1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

## Dale's Law Meets Geometric Brownian Motion: Multiplicative Updates for Sampling

## Anonymous Author(s)

Affiliation Address email

## Abstract

Gradient descent has proven to be a powerful and effective technique for optimization in numerous machine learning applications. Recent advances in computational neuroscience have shown that learning in standard gradient descent optimization formulation is not consistent with learning in biological systems. This has opened up interesting avenues for building biologically inspired learning techniques. One such approach is inspired by Dale's law, which states that inhibitory and excitatory synapses do not swap roles during the course of learning. The resulting exponential gradient descent optimization scheme leads to log-normally distributed synaptic weights. Interestingly, the density that satisfies the Fokker-Planck equation corresponding to the stochastic differential equation (SDE) with geometric Brownian motion (GBM) is the log-normal density. Leveraging this connection, we start with the SDE governing geometric Brownian motion, and show that discretizing the corresponding reverse-time SDE yields a multiplicative update rule, which surprisingly, coincides with the sampling equivalent of the exponential gradient descent update founded on Dale's law. Proceeding further, we propose a new formalism for multiplicative denoising score-matching, which subsumes the loss function proposed by Hyvärinen for non-negative data. Indeed, log-normally distributed data is positive and the proposed score-matching formalism turns out to be a natural fit. This allows for training of score-based models for image data and results in a novel multiplicative update scheme for sample generation starting from a log-normal density. Experimental results on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and Kuzushiji datasets demonstrate generative capability of the new scheme. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first instance of a biologically inspired generative model employing multiplicative updates, founded on geometric Brownian motion.

## 1 Introduction

An interesting problem in computational neuroscience is training artificial neural networks (ANNs) 26 in a fashion that is consistent with learning and optimization seen in biological systems. Several 27 studies [50, 36, 8, 38, 41] have confirmed that synaptic weight distributions in biological systems 28 are log-normally distributed and that the neurons obey Dale's law [15], which states that excitatory 29 (inhibitory) neurons stay excitatory (inhibitory) throughout the course of learning without synaptic 30 flips. Artificial neural networks trained with gradient descent seldom obey Dale's law. Recently, 31 Cornford et al. [12] proposed the use of exponentiated gradient descent (EGD) to train neural networks 32 and have observed that the training is consistent with Dale's law and leads to log-normally distributed 33 synaptic weights, in alignment with experimental findings. Exponentiated gradient descent is derived 34 using mirror descent for a particular variant of Bregman divergence. 35

In this paper, we establish a concrete link between exponentiated gradient descent optimization to 36 sampling from stochastic differential equations (SDEs) inspired by geometric Brownian motion 37 (GBM). Whereas most diffusion modeling and sampling schemes rely on standard Brownian motion, 38 to the best of our knowledge, this is the first instance where GBM is used. We show that the proposed 39 framework captures the multiplicative nature of updates seen in EGD. The ability of geometric 40 Brownian motion to model processes with proportional changes makes it an ideal candidate for 41 developing biologically inspired generative models. For the purpose of generation, we need the 42 underlying score function used in the reverse-time SDE, for which we develop a novel multiplicative 43 score-matching loss. While a large body of contemporary generative modeling literature is based on 44 SDEs with additive Gaussian noise, our novel formalism relies on an SDE that governs the forward 45 noising process dynamics with multiplicative log-normal noise. We develop the corresponding 46 reverse-time SDE and show that it results in a multiplicative update rule that is structurally equivalent 47 to the exponential gradient-descent scheme Cornford et al. [12]. The multiplicative update rule 48 obtained as a consequence of the discretization of the SDE can be used to sample from the desired 49 distribution whose score function is learnt using a neural network. We support the theoretical 50 developments with experimental results on MNIST [31], Fashion MNIST [60] and Kuzushiji image 51 datasets [10]. 52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

## 1.1 Related Works

Recent developments in generative modelling employing generative adversarial networks [18], diffusion models [21], score-based models [51, 52, 54], flow-based models [40] have produced stunning examples across a variety of modalities spanning images, video, audio, etc.. In the context of diffusion models, a seminal contribution has been the early work by Sohl-Dickstein et al. [47]. Inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, they introduced the diffusion probabilistic model as a tractable and flexible model for sampling and inference. They demonstrated generative capability on toy datasets in two dimensions and image datasets like binarized MNIST and CIFAR-10. Ho et al. [21] demonstrated that denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) could be used for high quality image synthesis. They vastly improved the results from Sohl-Dickstein et al. [47] and showed a performance comparable to state-of-the-art generative models [26, 27] of that time. Progress in score-matching by Song et al. [53], Song and Ermon [51, 52] demonstrated the potential of scorebased generative models to be competitive with diffusion models. In the seminal work of Song et al. [55], it was shown that an SDE framework unifies both approaches. These SDEs were based on standard Brownian motion. Several alternative formulations that obviate the need for Brownian motion were also proposed. In particular, Bansal et al. [2] propose generative models that are based on more generic degradation operations and their corresponding restoration operations. They consider blurring and masking among others as degradation operators and show that such generalized degradations could also be used to formulate generative models. Rissanen et al. [43] proposed that generation could be viewed as the time-reversal of a heat equation. Additionally, they showed that their approach allows for certain image properties like shape and colour to be disentangled and they also discuss spectral properties that reveal inductive biases in generative models. Santos et al. [45] developed a discrete state-space diffusion model that relies on a pure-death random process and demonstrate competitive generative ability on binarized MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA-64 datasets.

A recent preprint on image denoising by Vuong and Nguyen [57] is perhaps the closest to the multiplicative noise model considered in this paper. They consider a forward process where images are corrupted by multiplicative log-normal or gamma distributed noise. However, instead of proceeding with the multiplicative noise model, they convert it to an additive one by applying a logarithmic transformation. While the log-transformation simplifies the calculations, it reduces the problem to the additive noise setting, losing out completely on the richness of the original multiplicative noise framework. Vuong and Nguyen [57] remark explicitly that the reverse-time SDE in the multiplicative noise setting comes with a lot of complications, which are overcome by converting it to an additive noise model. They also restrict the scope of their work to denoising and do not propose a generative framework.

## 1.2 Organization of the paper

Section 2 gives an account of Dale's law and progress in computational neuroscience in deploying 88 exponentiated gradient descent to enforce Dale's law - all of these form the inspiration for this 89 work. In Section 3, we present the essential mathematics behind SDEs and generative modeling 90

required for understanding the contributions of this paper. Section 4 introduces Geometric Brownian 91 Motion (GBM) and its corresponding reverse-time SDE based sampler for image generation. This 92 necessitates a new score-matching framework for multiplicative noise which we define in Section 5. 93 Finally, Section 6 presents experiments on MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and Kuzushiji MNIST datasets, 94 demonstrating the effectiveness and potential of the proposed model. 95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

## 2 Dale's Law and Exponentiated Gradients

In computational neuroscience, Dale's law [15] has been empirically observed to hold in many biological systems barring certain exceptions. Dale's law states that presynaptic neurons can only exclusively affect their corresponding postsynaptic counterparts in an excitatory or inhibitory manner. The implication of the law is that the synapses continue to be inhibitory or excitatory during the course of learning without flipping. On the contrary, artificial neural networks have synaptic weights that can flip from excitatory to inhibitory or vice versa during training. Previous attempts [4, 58, 34] to incorporate biologically inspired learning rules to train neural networks have had limited success on standard benchmark tasks. Recently, Cornford et al. [11] demonstrated that ANNs that obey Dale's law, which they name Dale's ANNs (DANNs), can be constructed without loss in performance compared to weight updates done using standard gradient descent. They show that the ColumnEI models proposed by Song et al. [48] are suboptimal and can potentially impair the ability to learn by limiting the solution space of weights. DANNs outperform ColumnEI models on tasks across MNIST [31], Fashion-MNIST [60] and Kuzushiji MNIST datasets [10]. Cornford et al. [11] posit that the emergence and prevalence of Dale's law in biological systems is a possible evolutionary local minima and that the presence of inhibitory units in learning could help avoid catastrophic forgetting [3].

Li et al. [32] demonstrated that methods such as ColumnEI proposed by Song et al. [48] to incorporate Dale's law into the training of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) lead to suboptimal performance on sequence learning tasks, which is primarily attributed to poor spectral properties of the weight matrices, in particular, the multimodal, dispersed nature of the singular value spectrum of the weight matrix. Li et al. [32] extended the architecture developed by Cornford et al. [11] to handle sequences using RNNs and showed that these networks are on par with RNNs that are trained without incorporating Dale's law. The spectral properties of DANN RNNs are also better than the ColumnEI networks and the singular value spectrum is unimodal and clustered leading to superior performance on tasks such as the adding problem [22], sequential MNIST task [30] and language modelling using the Penn Tree Bank [37].

Cornford et al. [12] demonstrated that gradient descent is a suboptimal phenomenological fit to learning experiments in biologically relevant settings. While stochastic gradient descent for training ANNs is an exceptionally successful and robust model in general, it violates Dale's law [15] by allowing for synaptic flips. This leads to the distribution of weights not being log-normal, which contradicts experimentally observed data. Cornford et al. [12] showed that exponentiated gradient descent (EGD) introduced by Kivinen and Warmuth [29] respects Dale's law and consequently produces log-normally distributed weights. In experiments performed on the Mod-Cog framework [28] using RNNs, EGD outperforms gradient descent and is superior to GD for synaptic pruning. The learning task is formulated utilizing the mirror descent framework [39, 7] as changes to synaptic weights in a neural network such that a combination of task error and 'synaptic change penalty' must be minimized. This leads to the update rule:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ ℓ ( X ) = ℓ ( X k ) + ∇ ℓ ( X ) ⊤ | X = X k ( X -X k ) is the linearization of the task error ℓ ( X ) 134 about the point X k and D ϕ ( X , X k ) is the synaptic change penalty. The penalty D ϕ : R d × R d → R 135 is chosen as the Bregman divergence corresponding to a strictly convex function ϕ : R d → R . 136 Depending on the choice of ϕ , we get different update rules. For instance, when ϕ ( X ) = ∥ X ∥ 2 2 , 137 the corresponding synaptic change penalty is D ϕ ( X , X k ) = ∥ X -X k ∥ 2 2 , and Eq. (1) results in the 138 familiar gradient-descent update X k +1 = X k -η ∇ ℓ ( X ) | X = X k . This update rule for the weights 139 does not guarantee that the entries of X k +1 and X k have the same sign, which allows for synaptic 140 flips during training, as also confirmed by Cornford et al. [12]. 141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

Cornford et al. [12] chose ϕ ( X ) = d ∑ i =1 | X ( i ) | log | X ( i ) | , where X ( i ) denotes the i th entry of X , which results in D ϕ being the unnormalised relative entropy,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For this choice of D ϕ , the update rule in Eq. (1) takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ◦ denotes element-wise multiplication. The update in Eq. 2 is different from standard gradientdescent update in many ways: the update is multiplicative as opposed to additive, involves exponentiation, and preserves the sign of the entries of X k as iterations proceed. Effectively, the entries in X k for any k have the same sign as those in X 0 . The update rule in Eq. (2) is referred to as exponentiated gradient descent (EGD) [29].

By design, EGD doesn't allow synaptic flips and automatically respects Dale's law during the course of training. The update rule also leads to the weights being distributed log-normally as demonstrated by Pogodin et al. [41]. Exponentiated gradient-descent has been shown to perform on par with gradient descent for models trained on Mod-Cog tasks, although the final weight distributions are different. The networks for both updates are initialized with log-normal weights to adhere to experimental data that shows that the synaptic strengths of neurons in the brain are log-normally distributed [14, 35]. The network trained with gradient descent had a final weight distribution that was different from log-normal whereas the network trained with exponentiated gradient was log-normally distributed. Additionally, Cornford et al. [12] have shown that learning with EGD is more robust to synaptic weight pruning and EGD outperforms gradient descent when relevant inputs are sparse and in particular, for continuous control tasks. Pogodin et al. [41] showed that the distribution of converged weights depends on the geometry induced by the choice of the update algorithm. Gradient-descent updates implicitly assume Euclidean geometry, which is inconsistent with the log-normal weight distribution that is experimentally observed and is ill-suited to data arising in neuroscience.

A quick glance at Eq. (2) prompts the question: Does there exist a sampling equivalent for the exponentiated gradient-descent update rule? This is inspired by the link between gradient-descent and Langevin dynamics as enunciated by Wibisono [59]. In pursuit of an answer to this question, we realised the connection between the log-normally distributed weights observed at the end of exponentiated gradient descent and the sampling equation lies in geometric Brownian motion. The equilibrium distribution of GBM is the log-normal density and its time-reversal would give us the sampling formula we seek (discussed in Sec. 4).

## 3 Stochastic Differential Equations and Generative Modelling

Recent generative models such as diffusion models [21, 49] and score-based models rely heavily on the SDE framework. These models have been immensely successful in generating realistic samples across different data modalities such as images [55] and audio [42]. The key idea is to construct a stochastic process such that one starts with samples from the true, unknown density and progressively transforms them to samples from a noisy, easy-to-sample-from density such as the isotropic Gaussian. The task of generation requires inverting the forward process which goes beyond mere time reversal due to the stochastic nature of the dynamics. Theoretical results [1, 9, 55] show that there exists a corresponding reverse-time SDE for the forward process. The forward process is represented as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h ( · , t ) : R d → R d is the drift function, g ( · , t ) : R d → R d × d is the diffusion function, and W t denotes the standard Wiener process. We follow the Itô interpretation of SDEs throughout this paper. The corresponding reverse-time SDE for Eq. (3) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where d ¯ W t is the standard Brownian motion and ∇· F ( x ) := ( ∇· f 1 ( x ) , ∇· f 2 ( x ) , · · · , ∇· f d ( x )) ⊤ 181 is the row-wise divergence of the matrix-valued function F ( x ) := ( f 1 ( x ) , f 2 ( x ) , · · · , f d ( x )) ⊤ ∈ 182 R d × d . The issue with generating new samples from Eq. (4) is that we usually do not have access 183 to the score function ∇ log f X ( X t , t ) and this quantity is approximated using a neural network 184 s θ : R d × [0 , 1] → R d , which is trained by optimizing the denoising score-matching loss [55] 185

186

187

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∇ log p X t | X 0 ( X t | X 0 ) is determined by the forward SDE (Eq. (3) [46]) and λ ( t ) is designed to stabilise training.

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

## 4 Geometric Brownian Motion

Brownian motion, originally introduced to model random particle motion [16], is widely used in physics, biology, and signal processing to describe processes with independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) increments. The resulting distribution is Gaussian following the Central Limit Theorem. For example, the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck SDE (OU-SDE) [13] models the position Y t of a Brownian particle as d Y t = µ d t + σ d W t , where W t is a Wiener process, yielding Y t = Y 0 + µt + σW t , a Gaussian process with mean µ and variance σ 2 . Alternatively, when the relative increments (or ratios) follow the Brownian motion, the resulting stochastic process is called the Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM). Black and Scholes [6] pioneered the use of GBM for modeling the evolution of stock prices and financial assets in mathematical finance. Just as the normal distribution plays a crucial role in Brownian motion, the log-normal distribution plays a vital role in the analysis of GBM. Formally, a random process X t is said to follow a Geometric Brownian Motion if it satisfies the SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W t is the Wiener process, and µ and σ are known as the percentage drift representing a general trend and volatility coefficients representing the inherent stochasticity, respectively. The solution of Eq. (6) X t evolves to follow a log-normal distribution with parameters µ and σ 2 , i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There exist several multivariate extensions of GBM [23]. We consider the element-wise extension of Eq. (6) for image data with the forward SDE for time t ∈ [0 , 1] :

where ◦ denotes element-wise multiplication, µ ∈ R d , σ &gt; 0 and W t denotes the multivariate Wiener process. This can be written equivalently, using It ˆ o's lemma, as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where log is applied element-wise. The distribution of X t , as it evolves according to Eq. (8), has i.i.d. entries that are log-normally distributed with parameters µ and σ 2 I , I being the d × d identity matrix. Starting from a sample X 0 from the unknown density p X 0 , the solution to Eq. (8) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This closed-form expression allows us to easily generate samples from the forward process at arbitrary 204 time instants t ∈ [0 , 1] . The samples at the end of the forward process are log-normally distributed. 205 We now seek to derive the corresponding reverse-time SDE that would enable us to generate samples 206 from the unknown density p X 0 starting from samples from the log-normal density. While one could 207 use Eq. (4) to derive the corresponding reverse-time SDE, we propose a simpler approach by defining 208 an auxiliary stochastic process Y t = log X t and leveraging score change-of-variables formula [44]. 209 This allows us to rewrite Eq. (8) as 210

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="FNA

3SIfD

Z7R

w

rUT

Y

c0

&gt;

H

9M

G

o

uV

k

Q

jPB

J

m

p

W

L

X/gK

O

+C8

v

5

y

2

q

n

E

z

d

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="FNA

3SIfD

Z7R

w

rUT

Y

c0

&gt;

H

9M

G

o

uV

k

Q

jPB

J

m

p

W

L

X/gK

O

+C8

v

5

y

2

q

n

E

z

d

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="Wv

JD

E

p

fACGF

Vq

T

&gt;

3

c

ZRN

9Mw

r

o

u

Uk

QS

g

B

O

jm

5yH

7

2

8

X

/

L

Y

K

n

z

0

I

+

d

P

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="m

CIDBzXqr

5R

Sk

Ewj

2M3Y

&gt;A

F

H

cfZTL

dN

J

W

y

Q

K

o

V

0

8

U

P

p

O

g

/n

+

9

G

v

u

7

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="Ck

U0B

T

A

/

XVKgr

n

G

3

&gt;

F

cfZRN

9Mw

o

u

YQp

E

j

2

W

m

L

OH

D

+

8

v

P

5

y

7

q

S

z

I

J

d

&lt;latexi sh

1\_b

64="Ck

U0B

T

A

/

XVKgr

n

G

3

&gt;

F

cfZRN

9Mw

o

u

YQp

E

j

2

W

m

L

OH

D

+

8

v

P

5

y

7

q

S

z

I

J

d

Figure 1: The forward and reverse-time SDEs for Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM). The forward SDE describes the evolution of a clean image sample to a noisy one that eventually becomes lognormally distributed, while the reverse-time SDE captures the dynamics of the process and generates new samples from the unknown density starting from log-normal noise. This is enabled by the knowledge of the unknown density manifesting through the score function.

<!-- image -->

The reverse-time SDE corresponding to the forward SDE in Eq. (9) can be obtained by invoking 211 Eq. (4) and is given by 212

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∇ log p Y ( Y t , t ) is the score function corresponding to Y t and 1 is a vector of all ones. We 213 invoke the score change-of-variables formula [44] that allows us to represent ∇ log p Y t ( Y t , t ) in terms 214 of ∇ log p X t ( X t , t ) as ∇ log p Y t ( Y t , t ) = 1 + X t ◦ ∇ log p X t ( X t , t ) . Thus, we rewrite Eq. (10) in 215 terms of X t and simplify it to obtain 216

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To simulate the reverse-time SDE on a computer, it must be discretized in time. We chose the time 217 range [0 , 1] with N steps, which results in a step-size of δ = 1 N and for brevity, denote X kδ as X k , 218 for k = 0 , . . . , N -1 . In particular, we choose the Euler-Maruyama discretization scheme [20] for 219 Eq. (11) to get 220

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z k ∼ N ( 0 , I ) (the standard normal distribution), and since the log operates element-wise, 221 exponentiating both sides gives 222

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The update rule in Eq. (13) is similar to the EGD update rule in Eq. (2). Consider the optimization 223 problem with a modification of the task error as 224

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

with the choice of ξ : R d → R d as ξ ( i ) ( X ) = 0 . 5 ( X ( i ) ) 2 for i = 1 , 2 , · · · , d . This leads to the following multiplicative update rule

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Interestingly, if we assume that the density p X k ( X k , k ) is of the form p X k ( X k , k ) = 1 Z exp( -ℓ ( X k )) , with η = δσ 2 and µ = 3 σ 2 2 , then the corresponding sampling step in Eq. (13) is of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z k ∼ N ( 0 , I ) . Therefore, the proposed sampler is structurally equivalent to the modified exponential gradient descent step in Eq. (15).

## 5 Multiplicative Score Matching

Following the definitions of explicit score-matching (ESM) loss and denoising score-matching (DSM) loss for the additive noise case [56], we propose the multiplicative counterparts L M-ESM ( θ ) and L M-DSM ( θ ) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The two types of score-matching loss functions are related as follows.

Theorem 5.1 (Multiplicative Denoising Score-Matching) . Under standard assumptions on the density and the score function [24, 53] over the positive orthant R + d , the multiplicative explicit scorematching (M-ESM) loss given in Eq. (17) and multiplicative denoising score-matching (M-DSM) loss given in Eq. (18) are equivalent up to a constant, i.e., L M-DSM ( θ ) = L M-DSM ( θ ) + C , where C is independent of θ .

The proof is provided in the supplementary material. The usefulness of this result is explained next. We need the marginal score function ∇ log p X t ( X t ) in the reverse-time SDE Eq. (13) but optimizing Eq. (17) is intractable since we do not have access to the 'true' marginal score. The theorem provides us with a means to optimize for s θ in terms of the conditional score ∇ log p X t | X 0 ( X t | X 0 ) , which can be derived from the forward SDE. The challenge in leveraging Eq. (13) to generate new samples arises from our lack of knowledge of ∇ log p X t ( X t ) . This function must be estimated by some form of score-matching. To this end, we propose the following score-matching loss

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In practice, this choice of the loss function allows us to train the score network s θ using samples from the forward SDE in Eq. (7) and the corresponding conditional score ∇ log p X t | X 0 ( X t | X 0 ) evaluated at discrete instants of time t = kδ can be computed using the forward SDE and the expression for the target in the loss function is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proposed loss function in Eq. (19) is the multiplicative noise counterpart of the denoising score254 matching loss proposed by Song et al. [55] for additive noise. To the best of our knowledge, this 255 formulation of the score-matching loss and its manifestation in the multiplicative noise setting is new. 256 It would be appropriate to remark here that the score term in Eq. (13) also arises in the score-matching 257 loss proposed by Hyvärinen [25] for non-negative real data given by 258

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

Figure 2: Uncurated sample images generated from MNIST, Fashion-MNIST and Kuzushiji MNIST datasets, corresponding to the score model with minimum score-matching loss during training.

<!-- image -->

where ∇ log p X 0 ( X 0 ) is the true score. Hyvärinen [25]'s formulation is static in the sense that it does not leverage the SDE, whereas we do. Hyvärinen [25]'s score-matching loss can also be seen as an instance of the multiplicative explicit score-matching loss (M-ESM) for t = 0 . Hyvärinen [25]'s motivation for introducing this loss function is to avoid the singularity at the origin for non-negative data. Our framework encapsulates this variant of the score-matching loss as a special case. This is primarily due to the structure of GBM that assumes the log-normal distribution which implicitly restricts the samples to be positive. Thus, our framework generalizes the score-matching loss proposed by Hyvärinen [25] to the case of multiplicative noise.

Algorithm 1 Multiplicative updates for generation using Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM).

Require:

σ, δ, µ , trained score network s θ

- 1: for k ← 0 to N - 1 do

- 2: Z k ∼ N ( 0 , I )

$$3: X k - 1 = X k ◦ exp ( - δ ( µ - σ 2 2 1 ) + δσ 2 X k ◦ s θ ( X k , k ) + σ √ δ Z k )$$

- 4: end for

## 5.1 Image Generation using Multiplicative Score Matching

The goal in diffusion-based image generative modeling is to construct two stochastic processes, as illustrated in Fig. 1 - the forward process to generate a noisy version of a clean image and the reverse process to enable us to sample from the unknown density p X 0 . For the forward model, starting from an image X 0 coming from the unknown density, the forward SDE in Eq. (8) can be used to generate noisy versions of X 0 as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for k = 0 , . . . , N -2 , and X N -1 is log-normally distributed and Z k ∼ N ( 0 , I ) . For the reverse 273 process, i.e., generation, we can generate samples from the reverse-time SDE in Eq. (11) using the 274 discretized version of the reverse-time SDE in Eq. (13) and the score model s θ ( · ) trained with the loss 275 defined in Eq. (19) in place of the true score function ∇ log p X t ( · ) . The new generation/sampling 276 procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. The algorithm takes as input the parameters σ, δ, µ and 277 the trained score network s θ and generates samples from the unknown density p X 0 by iterating over 278 N steps. The algorithm starts with a sample X N -1 from the log-normal distribution and iteratively 279 updates the sample using the reverse-time SDE in Eq. (13). The final output should be a sample 280 X 0 ∼ p X 0 . 281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

## 6 Experiments

We evaluate the generative performance of the proposed model 1 by training the score model on standard datasets such as MNIST, Fashion-MNIST and Kuzushiji MNIST dataset used by Cornford et al. [11]. The datasets are split as 60 , 000 images for training and 10 , 000 images for testing. All images are rescaled to have pixel values in the range [1, 2]. Note that the proposed framework requires a non-negative dynamic range of pixel values. We choose N = 1000 discretization levels for the forward SDE (7) and leads to the step size δ = 1 /N . During sampling, we observed that the same step-size did not always work and we had to work with smaller step-sizes for each of the three datasets. The model is trained using the M-DSM loss defined in Eq. (19). The hyperparameters µ = σ 2 2 1 , σ and δ are set to 0 . 8 and 0 . 001 , respectively. The model is trained for 200000 iterations and the checkpoints are saved every 5000 iterations as mentioned in [52] on two NVIDIA RTX 4090 and two A6000 GPUs. We perform exponential moving average for the saved checkpoints every 50000 iterations. The generated samples are shown in Figure 2, from where we observe that the visual quality of the generated images matches is on par with that of the ground truth. For quantitative assessment, we use Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [19] and Kernel Inception Distance (KID) [5] measured between 10 , 000 images from the test dataset and the same number of generated images. Lower FID and KID values indicate superior generative performance. While both these metrics are not commonly used to quantify the generative performance for grayscale images, we follow Xu et al. [61] and report these numbers for transparency and reproducibility (cf. Supplementary Material).

## 7 Conclusions

We proposed a novel generative model based on Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) and a new technique for score-matching. We showed that the GBM framework is a natural setting for modeling non-negative data and that the new multiplicative score-matching loss can be used effectively to train the model. The model is capable of generating new samples from image datasets like MNIST, Fashion MNIST and Kuzushiji MNIST. The results are promising from a generative modeling perspective. The multiplicative score matching framework can also be suitably adapted for image denoising and restoration tasks where the forward model has multiplicative noise as opposed to the widely assumed additive noise. While this work focuses on log-normal noise, other distributions such as the gamma distribution, could also be considered with associated SDEs. This would broaden the applicability of the model to datasets and domains where various types of multiplicative noise are prevalent such as optical coherence tomography [33] and synthetic aperture radar [17], enabling more robust and versatile generative and restoration capabilities. Starting off with the results shown in the paper, one could also extend applicability of the proposed model to high-resolution images. Application to non-image data, such as financial time-series, is another potential direction for further research.

## Limitations

The proposed generative model requires a large amount of training data and computational resources to achieve good performance, which can be a constraint in some applications. In the true spirit of data-driven generation, some of the generated images do not have the same semantic meaning as samples from the source dataset. Incorporating semantics into generative modeling is a research direction by itself. Instead of cherry-picking the results, we reported them as obtained to highlight both the strengths and limitations of the proposed approach. The choice of hyperparameters, such as the noise schedule and learning rate, which are carefully tuned, can affect the performance of the model. However, this limitation is true of all deep generative models and not unique to ours.

Broader Impact : The proposed approach of leveraging the GBM and multiplicative score-matching is novel and has the potential to advance the field of generative modeling along new lines. The model may find natural applicability in financial time-series modeling, forecasting, and generation. Ethical concerns pertaining to the use of generative models and the potential for misuse by generating biased, fake, or misleading content are all pervasive and the proposed framework is no exception.

1 Code for this paper is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/gbm\_dale-CC20

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

## References

- [1] B. D. O. Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 12(3):313-326, 1982. ISSN 0304-4149. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0304-4149(82)90051-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/0304414982900515 .
- [2] A. Bansal, E. Borgnia, H.-M. Chu, J. Li, H. Kazemi, F. Huang, M. Goldblum, J. Geiping, and T. Goldstein. Cold diffusion: Inverting arbitrary image transforms without noise. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 41259-41282. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper\_files/paper/2023/file/ 80fe51a7d8d0c73ff7439c2a2554ed53-Paper-Conference.pdf .
- [3] H. C. Barron, T. P. V ogels, T. E. Behrens, and M. Ramaswami. Inhibitory engrams in perception and memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(26):6666-6674, 2017. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1701812114. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas. 1701812114 .
- [4] S. Bartunov, A. Santoro, B. A. Richards, L. Marris, G. E. Hinton, and T. P. Lillicrap. Assessing the scalability of biologically-motivated deep learning algorithms and architectures. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS'18, page 9390-9400, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.
- [5] M. Bi´ nkowski, D. J. Sutherland, M. Arbel, and A. Gretton. Demystifying MMD GANs. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=r1lUOzWCW .
- [6] F. Black and M. Scholes. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Economy , 81(3):637-654, 1973. ISSN 00223808, 1537534X. URL http://www.jstor.org/ stable/1831029 .
- [7] S. Bubeck. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Found. Trends Mach. Learn. , 8(3-4):231-357, Nov. 2015. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000050. URL https: //doi.org/10.1561/2200000050 .
- [8] G. Buzsáki and K. Mizuseki. The log-dynamic brain: how skewed distributions affect network operations. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 15(4):264-278, 2014. doi: 10.1038/nrn3687. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3687 .
- [9] D. Castanon. Reverse-time diffusion processes (corresp.). IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 28(6):953-956, 1982. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1982.1056571.
- [10] T. Clanuwat, M. Bober-Irizar, A. Kitamoto, A. Lamb, K. Yamamoto, and D. Ha. Deep learning for classical japanese literature, 2018. URL https://nips2018creativity.github. io/doc/deep\_learning\_for\_classical\_japanese\_literature.pdf . Presented at the Machine Learning for Creativity and Design Workshop, NeurIPS 2018, Montreal, Canada.
- [11] J. Cornford, D. Kalajdzievski, M. Leite, A. Lamarquette, D. M. Kullmann, and B. A. Richards. Learning to live with dale's principle: {ANN}s with separate excitatory and inhibitory units. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=eU776ZYxEpz .
- [12] J. Cornford, R. Pogodin, A. Ghosh, K. Sheng, B. A. Bicknell, O. Codol, B. A. Clark, G. Lajoie, and B. A. Richards. Brain-like learning with exponentiated gradients. bioRxiv , 2024. doi: 10. 1101/2024.10.25.620272. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2024/10/ 26/2024.10.25.620272 .
- [13] J. L. Doob. The brownian movement and stochastic equations. Annals of Mathematics , 43 375 (2):351-369, 1942. ISSN 0003486X, 19398980. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 376 1968873 . 377

- [14] S. Dorkenwald, N. L. Turner, T. Macrina, K. Lee, R. Lu, J. Wu, A. L. Bodor, A. A. Bleckert, 378 D. Brittain, N. Kemnitz, W. M. Silversmith, D. Ih, J. Zung, A. Zlateski, I. Tartavull, S.-C. Yu, 379 S. Popovych, W. Wong, M. Castro, C. S. Jordan, A. M. Wilson, E. Froudarakis, J. Buchanan, 380 M. M. Takeno, R. Torres, G. Mahalingam, F. Collman, C. M. Schneider-Mizell, D. J. Bumbarger, 381 Y. Li, L. Becker, S. Suckow, J. Reimer, A. S. Tolias, N. Macarico da Costa, R. C. Reid, and 382 H. S. Seung. Binary and analog variation of synapses between cortical pyramidal neurons. 383 eLife , 11:e76120, nov 2022. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.76120. URL https: 384 //doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76120 . 385

386

387

388

389

- [15] J. C. Eccles, P. Fatt, and K. Koketsu. Cholinergic and inhibitory synapses in a pathway from motor-axon collaterals to motoneurones. The Journal of Physiology , 126(3):524-562, 1954. doi: https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1954.sp005226. URL https://physoc.onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1113/jphysiol.1954.sp005226 .

390

391

392

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

- [16] R. Feynman, R. Leighton, M. Sands, and E. Hafner. The Feynman Lectures on Physics; Vol. I , volume 33. AAPT, 1965.
- [17] G. Fracastoro, E. Magli, G. Poggi, G. Scarpa, D. Valsesia, and L. Verdoliva. Deep learning methods for synthetic aperture radar image despeckling: An overview of trends and perspectives. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine , 9(2):29-51, 2021. doi: 10.1109/MGRS.2021. 3070956.
- [18] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 2014.
- [19] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter. GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper\_ files/paper/2017/file/8a1d694707eb0fefe65871369074926d-Paper.pdf .
- [20] D. J. Higham. An algorithmic introduction to numerical simulation of stochastic differential equations. SIAM Review , 43(3):525-546, 2001. doi: 10.1137/S0036144500378302. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144500378302 .
- [21] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS , 2020.
- [22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8): 1735-1780, 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
- [23] Y. Hu. Multi-dimensional geometric brownian motions, onsager-machlup functions, and applications to mathematical finance. Acta Mathematica Scientia , 20(3):341-358, 2000. ISSN 0252-9602. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0252-9602(17)30641-0. URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0252960217306410 .
- [24] A. Hyvärinen. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 6(24), 2005. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v6/ hyvarinen05a.html .
- [25] A. Hyvärinen. Some extensions of score matching. Computational Statistics &amp; Data Analysis , 51(5):2499-2512, 2007. ISSN 0167-9473. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2006.09.003. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167947306003264 .
- [26] T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen. Progressive growing of GANs for improved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hk99zCeAb .
- [27] T. Karras, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila. Training generative adversarial networks with limited data. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 12104-12114. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper\_files/paper/2020/file/8d30aa96e72440759f74bd2306c1fa3d-Paper.pdf .

428

429

430

431

432

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

462

463

464

465

466

467

468

469

470

471

472

473

474

- [28] M. Khona, S. Chandra, J. J. Ma, and I. R. Fiete. Winning the lottery with neural connectivity constraints: Faster learning across cognitive tasks with spatially constrained sparse rnns. Neural Computation , 35(11):1850-1869, 2023. doi: 10.1162/neco\_a\_01613.
- [29] J. Kivinen and M. K. Warmuth. Exponentiated gradient versus gradient descent for linear predictors. Information and Computation , 132(1):1-63, 1997. ISSN 0890-5401. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/inco.1996.2612. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0890540196926127 .
- [30] Q. V. Le, N. Jaitly, and G. E. Hinton. A simple way to initialize recurrent networks of rectified linear units. CoRR , abs/1504.00941, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.00941 .
- [31] Y. LeCun and C. Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.lecun. com/exdb/mnist/ .
- [32] P. Li, J. Cornford, A. Ghosh, and B. Richards. Learning better with dale's law: A spectral perspective. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 944-956. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper\_files/paper/ 2023/file/02dd0db10c40092de3d9ec2508d12f60-Paper-Conference.pdf .
- [33] S. Li, R. Higashita, H. Fu, B. Yang, and J. Liu. Score prior guided iterative solver for speckles removal in optical coherent tomography images. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , 29(1):248-258, 2025. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2024.3480928.
- [34] T. P. Lillicrap, A. Santoro, L. Marris, C. J. Akerman, and G. Hinton. Backpropagation and the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 21(6):335-346, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41583-020-0277-3. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0277-3 .
- [35] Y. Loewenstein, A. Kuras, and S. Rumpel. Multiplicative dynamics underlie the emergence of the log-normal distribution of spine sizes in the neocortex in vivo. Journal of Neuroscience , 31(26):9481-9488, 2011. ISSN 0270-6474. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6130-10.2011. URL https://www.jneurosci.org/content/31/26/9481 .
- [36] Y. Loewenstein, A. Kuras, and S. Rumpel. Multiplicative dynamics underlie the emergence of the log-normal distribution of spine sizes in the neocortex in vivo. The Journal of Neuroscience , 31(26):9481-9488, June 2011. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6130-10.2011. URL https://www. jneurosci.org/content/31/26/9481 .
- [37] M. P. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. A. Marcinkiewicz. Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics , 19(2):313-330, 1993. URL https://aclanthology.org/J93-2004/ .
- [38] J. B. Melander, A. Nayebi, B. C. Jongbloets, D. A. Fortin, M. Qin, S. Ganguli, T. Mao, and H. Zhong. Distinct in vivo dynamics of excitatory synapses onto cortical pyramidal neurons and parvalbumin-positive interneurons. Cell Reports , 37(6):109972, 2021. ISSN 2211-1247. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109972. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S2211124721014510 .
- [39] A. S. Nemirovsky and D. B. Yudin. Problem complexity and method efficiency in optimization. SIAM Review , 27(2):264-265, 1985. doi: 10.1137/1027074. URL https://doi.org/10. 1137/1027074 .
- [40] G. Papamakarios, E. Nalisnick, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and B. Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(57):1-64, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/19-1028.html .
- [41] R. Pogodin, J. Cornford, A. Ghosh, G. Gidel, G. Lajoie, and B. A. Richards. Synaptic weight distributions depend on the geometry of plasticity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=x5txICnnjC .

- [42] J. Richter, D. De Oliveira, and T. Gerkmann. Investigating training objectives for generative 475 476
2. speech enhancement. In ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1-5, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025. 477 10887784. 478

479

480

481

- [43] S. Rissanen, M. Heinonen, and A. Solin. Generative modelling with inverse heat dissipation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=4PJUBT9f2Ol .

482

483

484

485

486

487

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

505

506

507

508

509

510

511

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

- [44] S. Robbins. Score change of variables, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07904 .
- [45] J. E. Santos, Z. R. Fox, N. Lubbers, and Y. T. Lin. Blackout diffusion: generative diffusion models in discrete-state spaces. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML'23. JMLR.org, 2023.
- [46] S. Särkkä and A. Solin. Applied stochastic differential equations , volume 10. Cambridge University Press, 2019.
- [47] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In F. Bach and D. Blei, editors, Proc. of the 32nd Intl. Conf. on Machine Learning , volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , Lille, France, 07-09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v37/sohl-dickstein15.html .
- [48] H. F. Song, G. R. Yang, and X.-J. Wang. Training excitatory-inhibitory recurrent neural networks for cognitive tasks: A simple and flexible framework. PLoS Comput. Biol. , 12(2):e1004792, Feb. 2016.
- [49] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=St1giarCHLP .
- [50] S. Song, P. J. Sjöström, M. Reigl, S. Nelson, and D. B. Chklovskii. Highly nonrandom features of synaptic connectivity in local cortical circuits. PLoS Biology , 3(3):e68, 2005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030068. URL https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/ article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.0030068 .
- [51] Y. Song and S. Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS , 2019.
- [52] Y. Song and S. Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS , 2020.
- [53] Y. Song, S. Garg, J. Shi, and S. Ermon. Sliced score matching: A scalable approach to density and score estimation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI , 2019. URL http://auai.org/uai2019/proceedings/papers/204. pdf .
- [54] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= PxTIG12RRHS .
- [55] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS .
- [56] P. Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Computation , 23(7), 2011. doi: 10.1162/NECO\_a\_00142.
- [57] A. Vuong and T. Nguyen. Perception-based multiplicative noise removal using sdes, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10283 .

- [58] J. C. R. Whittington and R. Bogacz. Theories of error Back-Propagation in the brain. Trends 522 Cogn Sci , 23(3):235-250, Jan. 2019. 523

524

525

526

- [59] A. Wibisono. Sampling as optimization in the space of measures: The Langevin dynamics as a composite optimization problem. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference On Learning Theory , 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v75/wibisono18a.html .

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

- [60] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms, 2017.
- [61] C. Xu, X. Cheng, and Y. Xie. Normalizing flow neural networks by jko scheme. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 47379-47405. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper\_files/paper/2023/file/ 93fce71def4e3cf418918805455d436f-Paper-Conference.pdf .

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

565

566

567

568

569

570

571

572

573

574

575

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

## NeurIPS Paper Checklist

The checklist is designed to encourage best practices for responsible machine learning research, addressing issues of reproducibility, transparency, research ethics, and societal impact. Do not remove the checklist: The papers not including the checklist will be desk rejected. The checklist should follow the references and follow the (optional) supplemental material. The checklist does NOT count towards the page limit.

Please read the checklist guidelines carefully for information on how to answer these questions. For each question in the checklist:

- You should answer [Yes] , [No] , or [NA] .
- [NA] means either that the question is Not Applicable for that particular paper or the relevant information is Not Available.
- Please provide a short (1-2 sentence) justification right after your answer (even for NA).

The checklist answers are an integral part of your paper submission. They are visible to the reviewers, area chairs, senior area chairs, and ethics reviewers. You will be asked to also include it (after eventual revisions) with the final version of your paper, and its final version will be published with the paper.

The reviewers of your paper will be asked to use the checklist as one of the factors in their evaluation. While "[Yes] " is generally preferable to "[No] ", it is perfectly acceptable to answer "[No] " provided a proper justification is given (e.g., "error bars are not reported because it would be too computationally expensive" or "we were unable to find the license for the dataset we used"). In general, answering "[No] " or "[NA] " is not grounds for rejection. While the questions are phrased in a binary way, we acknowledge that the true answer is often more nuanced, so please just use your best judgment and write a justification to elaborate. All supporting evidence can appear either in the main paper or the supplemental material, provided in appendix. If you answer [Yes] to a question, in the justification please point to the section(s) where related material for the question can be found.

## IMPORTANT, please:

- Delete this instruction block, but keep the section heading 'NeurIPS Paper Checklist" ,
- Keep the checklist subsection headings, questions/answers and guidelines below.
- Do not modify the questions and only use the provided macros for your answers .

## 1. Claims

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper's contributions and scope?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. Our contributions are clearly stated in the abstract and introduction in Sec. 1. The claims made in the paper are supported by theoretical results and experimental evaluations in Sec. 4 and Sec. 6.

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper.
- The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
- The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
- It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper.

## 2. Limitations

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. Please refer to page 9 for a discussion of the limitations of the proposed model.

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
- The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
- The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
- The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
- The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
- The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size.
- If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness.
- While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren't acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

## 3. Theory assumptions and proofs

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes, please refer to the supplementary material for the proof of Theorem 5.1. Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
- All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and crossreferenced.
- All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
- The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition.
- Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
- Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

## 4. Experimental result reproducibility

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. We use publicly-accessible datasets such as MNIST [31], Fashion MNIST [60] and Kuzushiji MNIST [10]. The code is available at https://anonymous. 4open.science/r/gbm\_dale-CC20 and includes instructions to reproduce the results.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not.
- If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
- Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
- While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example
- (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.
- (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully.
- (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).
- (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

## 5. Open access to data and code

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. The code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ gbm\_dale-CC20 and includes instructions to reproduce the results. The datasets used in the experiments are publicly available.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
- Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so 'No' is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).
- The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
- The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.

- At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable).
- Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

## 6. Experimental setting/details

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes, please refer to Sec. 6 for the details of the experimental setup.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
- The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

## 7. Experiment statistical significance

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

Answer: [No]

Justification: We cannot afford to report error bars for experiments since they are computationally extremely expensive.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.
- The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).
- The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
- The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
- It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.
- It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.
- For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).
- If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

## 8. Experiments compute resources

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Please refer to the supplementary material.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

743

744

745

746

747

748

749

750

751

752

753

754

755

756

757

758

759

760

761

762

763

764

765

766

767

768

769

770

771

772

773

774

775

776

777

778

779

780

781

782

783

784

785

786

787

788

789

790

791

792

793

- The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
- The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
- The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn't make it into the paper).

## 9. Code of ethics

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. We adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
- If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics.
- The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

## 10. Broader impacts

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. Please see page 9.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
- If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
- Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
- The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.
- The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
- If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

## 11. Safeguards

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: The code is publicly available and is subject to the discretion of the user, also see page 9.

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
- Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
- Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
- We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.

## 12. Licenses for existing assets

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: All datasets, code and models used are cited.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
- The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
- The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
- The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
- For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided.
- If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
- For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
- If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset's creators.

## 13. New assets

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes. The link to code to reproduce our experimental observations has been provided in the footnote on page 9.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
- Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc.
- The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used.
- At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

## 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: No human subjects were involved.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper.
- According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.

## 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: No human subjects were involved.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper.
- We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution.
- For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

## 16. Declaration of LLM usage

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.

Answer: [NA]

Justification: LLM has been used only for minor editing and formatting purposes.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
- Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described.