## VLForgery Face Triad: Detection, Localization and Attribution via Multimodal Large Language Models

Xinan He 1 , Yue Zhou 2 ∗ , Bing Fan 3 , Bin Li 2 , Guopu Zhu 4 , Feng Ding 1 † 1 Nanchang University shahur@email.ncu.edu.cn; fengding@ncu.edu.cn 2 Shenzhen University 2450042008@email.szu.edu.cn; libin@szu.edu.cn 3 University of North Texas bingfan@my.unt.edu 4 Harbin Institute of Technology guopu.zhu@hit.edu.cn

## Abstract

Faces synthesized by diffusion models (DMs) with high-quality and controllable attributes pose a significant challenge for Deepfake detection. Most state-of-the-art detectors only yield a binary decision, incapable of forgery localization, attribution of forgery methods, and providing analysis on the cause of forgeries. In this work, we integrate Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) within DMbased face forensics, and propose a fine-grained analysis triad framework called VLForgery , that can 1) predict falsified facial images; 2) locate the falsified face regions subjected to partial synthesis; and 3) attribute the synthesis with specific generators. To achieve the above goals, we introduce VLF (Visual Language Forensics), a novel and diverse synthesis face dataset designed to facilitate rich interactions between ' V isual' and ' L anguage' modalities in MLLMs. Additionally, we propose an extrinsic knowledge-guided description method, termed EkCot , which leverages knowledge from the image generation pipeline to enable MLLMs to quickly capture image content. Furthermore, we introduce a low-level vision comparison pipeline designed to identify differential features between real and fake that MLLMs can inherently understand. These features are then incorporated into EkCot, enhancing its ability to analyze forgeries in a structured manner, following the sequence of detection, localization, and attribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VLForgery outperforms other state-of-the-art forensic approaches in detection accuracy, with additional potential for falsified region localization and attribution analysis.

## 1 Introduction

AI-generated faces have enriched human life by creating realistic virtual characters that enhance our experiences in various creative industries. However, the domain of AI-generated face forensics is encountering unprecedented challenges due to the rapid advancement of generative models [8, 55, 49, 12, 24, 57]. In particular, diffusion models [38, 35] generate synthetic faces with substantially higher fidelity than earlier technologies such as variational autoencoders (V AEs) [41], rendering it increasingly challenging for detectors to identify subtle forgery artifacts. This development has led to a significant surge in the proliferation of forgeries, which present grave threats to personal privacy and security.

Several pioneering studies [3, 17, 44, 4, 48, 54] have investigated diffusion model (DM)-generated image forensics and demonstrated the effectiveness of their proposed models. However, a notable

∗ The author contributed equally to this work.

† Corresponding author

limitation of these approaches is their lack of clear analysis for the underlying causes of the forgeries. Specifically, most existing studies focus solely on detection, neglecting the localization of forgeries or attributing specific generation methods to them.

Recently, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for complex scene characterization.By leveraging extensive pre-training on both images and text, MLLMs can interpret visual tasks through natural language, providing a more nuanced understanding of forensic analysis [53, 14]. However, MLLM-based models face two primary limitations. First , forensic analysis research with MLLMs has largely focused on traditional face-swapping Deepfakes [36, 22], with limited analysis of DM-based synthetic faces. While recent work [53, 14] has shown that automated descriptions generated by MLLMs ( e.g. , ChatGPT-4) or manual annotations guiding MLLMtraining, effectively capture artifacts in traditional face-swapping Deepfakes, these approaches still face challenges in generating credible forgery descriptions, particularly for high-fidelity DMbased images where subtle artifacts often evade detection. The primary issue lies in their reliance on subjective human-defined judgment biases to guide the generation of descriptions. Such descriptions may not align with the forgery knowledge that the models inherently understand. Additionally, MLLMs are typically trained for semantic-level visual alignment, lacking fine-grained forensic perception capabilities, which can lead to hallucinations in the generated descriptions. Second , none of the existing MLLM-based methods attempt fine-grained DeepFake forensics that simultaneously addresses Detection , Localization , and Attribution .

To address these challenges, we propose a triad framework-encompassing detection, localization, and attribution-designed for AI-generated face forensics, referred to as VLForgery . In the proposed framework, to address the lack of data specifically tailored for DM-based partial synthesis face, we create diverse prompt repositories and templates to build a new multimodal Visual Language Forensic ( VLF ) dataset, suitable for the triad tasks of detection, localization, and attribution.

Second, to enhance the reliability of MLLMs-generated descriptions, we introduce a low-level vision comparison pipeline that identifies low-level vision discrepancies between real and fake sample sets, guiding MLLMs to generate high-confidence descriptions. Building on this, we develop a description generation module, where we design an Extrinsic knowledge-guided Chain-of-thought ( EkCot ) method. This method also integrates additional knowledge from the generation pipeline, enabling the model to quickly grasp image content. Third, we develop a unified MLLMs fine-tuning and inference module, where we aggregate the generated images and corresponding descriptions to fine-tune MLLMs.

Specifically, VLForgery incorporates external information relevant to DM-based image generation with the low-level vision discrepancies between real and fake to structure a systematic analytical approach, allowing MLLMs to evaluate the image through the following steps: 1) Detection : identify whether the image is real or AI-generated; 2) Localization : For synthetic images, determine if the forgery is partial (only specific regions are altered) or full (the entire image is synthetic). For partial forgeries, locate the altered regions; 3) Attribution : Determine the likely method or model used to generate the forgery.

Our contribution can be summarized as follows:

- We investigate the potential of MLLMs in tackling AI-generated face forensics challenges by proposing the framework VLForgery. Additionally, we designed an extrinsic knowledgeguided chain-of-thought method, termed EkCot, that can assist the MLLMs in achieving fine-grained forensics performance.
- Weintroduce the VLF dataset, a new multimodal Visual Language Forensic dataset generated by diffusion models, designed to address the needs of fine-grained forensics tasks.
- We present a comprehensive evaluation experiment tailored to assess VLForgery on finegrained forensic tasks. This evaluation encompasses three task scenarios, and 9 DM-based face types.

## 2 Related Work

## 2.1 DM-Generated Images

Recent advancements have centered on diffusion models [38], which have demonstrated exceptional performance in generating high-fidelity face images with high quality. Many studies have also

Figure 1: The comparison pipeline of low-level vision. By extracting the most distinctive low-level vision descriptors that differentiate the real and fake sample sets, we establish judgment biases for the MLLMs.

<!-- image -->

incorporated attention mechanisms to enhance the controllability of generated content [18, 23] such as text-guided [35, 30, 45, 32, 50, 2] and subject-guided [37, 21, 52, 16]. These achievements have led to the proposal of many DM-based datasets, such as object-oriented image datasets [56, 7, 39] and face-oriented image datasets [5, 24]. However, most DM-based partially synthesized face datasets suffer from poor quality and lack sufficient ground truth to support more fine-grained forensics tasks, such as forgery localization and attribution.

## 2.2 Fine-grained Forensics of DM-based Images

For Detecting tasks, traditional works usually attempt to find the traces left by diffusion models to expose synthesized images. For example, Chen et al. [3] proposed DRCT, a universal framework to enhance the generalizability of the existing detectors for detecting DM-based images. Recognizing the robust semantic comprehension capabilities of pre-trained vision-language models ( e.g. , CLIP [34]), recent studies [17, 31] have demonstrated their promising results in detecting DM-generated images. For Locating tasks, a primary goal is for the detector to provide predictions with a localization map indicating which regions have been manipulated or to identify forgery artifacts within DMbased images. Guo et al. [10] proposed a hierarchical fine-grained Image Forgery Detection and Localization (IFDL) framework consisting of three components: a multi-branch feature extractor, localization, and classification modules. Zhang et al. [51] centers on detecting and segmenting artifact areas that are only perceptible to human observers, rather than identifying the full manipulation region. For Attributing tasks, the objective is to recognize the specific diffusion model that generates the images. Guarnera et al. [9] concentrate on attributing DM-generated images through a multilevel hierarchical approach. However, the aforementioned studies address the tasks of detection, localization, and attribute individually, and there is a notable absence of research that integrates these tasks into a unified framework.

## 2.3 Multimodal Large Language Models in Forensics

Recently, some studies have commenced utilizing MLLMs to investigate analytical ability within the field of forensics. Jia et al. [15] pioneered the exploration of the forensic capabilities of prompt engineering using ChatGPT. Zhang et al. [53] proposed incorporating common-sense reasoning to enhance traditional deepfake detection by manually labeling the manipulated regions and extending it to develop a Visual Question Answering (VQA) framework. Huang et al. [14] recently proposed an automatic method utilizing GPT-4o for annotations, thereby replacing human annotators. These studies primarily focus on traditional Deepfakes and are limited to single-forensic scenarios, lacking the capability to locate or attribute forgery areas in synthesized images. In the case of forgery artifacts from high-fidelity faces generated by diffusion models, generating credible forgery analyses may pose greater challenges. Ours, compared to other MLLM-based forensic frameworks, can guide MLLMs to generate highly credible fine-grained forgery descriptions and is applicable to a broader range of forgery types and more complex forensic scenarios.

Figure 2: Construction of three modules for VLForgery framework: Data Acquisition, Description Generation Module, and MLLMs Fine-tuning and Inference Module.

<!-- image -->

## 3 VLForgery Framework

With the development of generative technologies, methods like diffusion models have emerged. Compared with traditional generative AI techniques (eg, VAE), the diffusion models enable partial synthesis guided by masks and text descriptions, as well as full synthesis through identity insertion or text descriptions. Therefore, our VLF dataset encompasses both partial and full synthesis types. In the following sections, we will demonstrate how to acquire their corresponding prompts and/or images. Furthermore, we will elaborate on the specific details of our proposed Description Generation Module and MLLMs Fine-tunning and Inference Module in VLForgery.

## 3.1 Data Acquisition

This section primarily outlines the pipeline details for collecting data. We synthesized all DMgenerated data according to the requirements of the fine-grained forensics tasks. The details of the generation, involving partial and full synthesis, will be described in the following sections. For a more detailed introduction to the dataset, please refer to Sec. B.

## 3.1.1 Partial Synthesis

In this part, we define the pipeline for partial synthesis. An exemplar pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2(a).

To ensure the high quality of the partially synthesized images, we utilized the well-established facial dataset CelebAMask-HQ [19] as a data source since it already contains landmarks for various face attributes such as nose, brow, hair, ears, eyes, and teeth. Then, we use GPT-4o to generate each facial attribute dictionary and prompt template. For each image, we randomly combine masks to generate masked faces. Based on the generated masked face, we choose and combine templates for the corresponding attributes, then randomly select descriptive keywords from the relevant attribute dictionary to populate the templates, thereby generating the final prompt for image partial synthesis. During the image generation phase, we input the generated masked face, corresponding final prompt, and pristine face into the Inpainting Generator to produce an inpainted face.

## 3.1.2 Full Synthesis

We introduce two types of fully synthesized forgery: generating identity insertion (Fig. 2(b)) and non-existent faces (Fig. 2(c)). Both generation approaches utilize the same prompt template with slight modifications. In the face identity insertion pipeline, the objective is to preserve the original facial identity while situating it within a new scene. This pipeline initially uses a Face Feature Extractor to capture identity-specific features. In the generation of non-existent faces, the diffusion model creates images of completely new faces that are unrelated to any existing individual based on a given prompt.

## 3.2 Description Generation Module

This module leverages the extrinsic information required throughout the low-level vision comparison pipeline and the data acquisition processes to guide the construction of the forgery analysis description for each type of forgery sample in the VLF dataset. In this section, we introduce the workflows of the low-level vision comparison pipeline and the construction of EKCot separately. We provide a detailed low-level vision analysis along with all the details and data you may need (refer to Sec C).

## 3.2.1 Low-level Feature Comparison Pipeline

Motivation: In previous studies[46, 14], researchers attempted to generate explainable descriptions for Deepfakes using Vision Large Language Models. However, hallucinations are commonly observed in VQA tasks. Forensic analysis places more emphasis on the perception of image fine-grained details compared with general VQA tasks. Therefore, in the absence of ground-truth labels to supervise these explainable descriptions, how can we determine their correctness?

To address this challenge, we aim to seek forensic features that the model itself can understand to discriminate the authenticity of an image, thereby mitigating the model's struggles with explainable description generation. Therefore, we propose a low-level vision comparison pipeline that leverages the visual feature understanding capabilities of vision-large-language models (VLLMs) to identify low-level vision discrepancies between real and fake sample sets, as illustrated in Fig. 1. First, we randomly select one image from the real sample set and another from the fake sample set, as I 1 and I 2 . Notably, the VLLMs is unaware of which image is real and which is fake. Furthermore, to comprehensively verify the low-level visual discrepancies between the real and fake sample sets, we selected ten distinct aspects and designed corresponding descriptive templates for each, as T tem (refer to Sec. C.1).

Initially, I 1 and I 2 are processed by the vision encoder E v , which generates the corresponding token representations T img . These tokens, along with the comparison template tokens T tem , are then fed into the V LLM () for generating low-level vision discrepancies text O l . It is formulated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Judgment Bias filtering: Given O 1 l , O 2 l , we first perform tokenization and part-of-speech tagging to extract compound noun phrases. Next, we compute the proportion of each extracted compound noun phrase across all low-level vision discrepancy texts. Finally, we identify the top ten phrases with the largest proportion difference between the real and fake sample sets, selecting them as the judgment biases for the MLLMs. These phrases are then used to generate the final usable judgment bias descriptors through a predefined template (refer to Sec. C.3).

Furthermore, to avoid potential model interpretation biases, we selected the Llama-3.2-11B-Vision[1] model as the VLLM for the low-level vision comparison pipeline, ensuring consistency with the models used in subsequent stages.

## 3.2.2 Construction of EkCot

As shown in Fig. 2(d), we utilized MLLMs as the description generation model to construct a chain of thought for forgery analysis, termed EkCot. Initially, we propose a General Rule template designed to integrate the extrinsic information required for generating desired data. The extrinsic information includes the prompts used within the pipeline, the corresponding ground truth for the generated image, and the low-level vision judgment bias, which are subsequently combined to serve as prompt inputs for MLLMs. The ground truth encompasses several categories, including real/fake, forgery type,

forgery region, and forgery method. For pristine images, the forgery type, forgery region and forgery method values are set to 'none' by default. Additionally, image original features are provided as visual inputs to the MLLMs. Furthermore, we utilize the Llama-3.2-11B-Vision[1] as the description generation model.

## 3.3 MLLMs Fine-tuning and Inference Module

In this module, we designed the final fine-tuning data structure and the details of MLLMs fine-tuning. Final Fine-tuning Data Structure. The final fine-tuning data is composed in the form of triplets:

&lt; visual, question, answer &gt; . For question's format, we use ChatGPT-4o to generate a range of question formats, as shown in Fig. 2(e), for example: 'Is this image real or fake? Can you provide the reasoning behind your judgment?' For each triplet, the question is presented in a randomly generated format. Additionally, each image is linked to its corresponding specific description (i.e., the answer). For the answer's format, we designed it to address three primary forensic tasks: detection,

localization, and attribution. The answer format follows this pattern: 'Detection Result: real/fake' + A result + 'Forgery Type' + 'Falsified Region' + 'Forgery Method' , where A result denotes the analysis of detection results. For analysis steps, our objective is to guide the model to adopt a chain of thought, performing each step sequentially as follows: 1)Real or Fake Judgment: The authenticity of the image is first assessed. If an image is identified as a forgery, the type of forgery is then classified into one of three categories: partial synthesis, identity insertion, and non-existent faces. The reasons for the detection result are further analyzed. 2) Localization of Falsified Region: If the forgery involves partial synthesis, the specific regions of manipulation ( e.g. , nose, brow, hair, ear) are identified. In cases involving multiple edits ( e.g. , hairAndnose), each forged region is localized. 3) Attribution of Synthesis Face Generator: The final step determines the generator of the synthesis face. Fine-tunning

and Inference Process. We fine-tune the MLLMs on the final fine-tuning data through a structured two-step process (Fig. 2(f)). Inspired by LLaV A [25], we adopt their published Llava-1.5-7B model and training architecture. First, we fine-tune a projector to align the facial visual features extracted from the frozen CLIP visual encoder with the corresponding question text features. This alignment links the synthetic face's forgery artifacts with corresponding ground truth and detailed forgery descriptions. Second, we employ Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [13] (rank=128, alpha=256) to selectively update the model by adjusting only the LoRA parameters, effectively fine-tuning the pre-trained language model.

During inference, the input is structured as a tuple &lt; image, question &gt; . For the questions, we continue to use ChatGPT-4 to generate diverse question formats, ensuring input variety. Finally, the model's response is structured, similar to the final fine-tuning data's answer format.

This approach ensures the model conducts forensic analysis on input faces in a structured, stepwise manner according to a pre-defined reasoning framework, thereby improving both its fine-grained forgery analysis and forensic accuracy.

Table 1: VLF dataset.

| Type                       | Source          | Samples   | Samples   |
|----------------------------|-----------------|-----------|-----------|
|                            |                 | train     | test      |
| Pristine                   | FFHQ            | 42k       | 14k       |
|                            | FF++ (original) | 12k       | 4.5k      |
|                            | CelebA-HQ       | 18k       | 6k        |
| DM-based Partial Synthesis | SDXL            | 76k       | 19k       |
|                            | SD2             | 76k       | 19k       |
|                            | Kandinsky2.2    | 76k       | 19k       |
| DM-based Full Synthesis    | SDXL            | 24k       | 6k        |
|                            | SD2             | 24k       | 6k        |
|                            | SD3             | 24k       | 6k        |
|                            | Kandinsky2.2    | 24k       | 6k        |
|                            | Flux            | 24k       | 6k        |
|                            | InstantID       | 8.1k      | 2.5k      |

Figure 3: Qualitative results. The upper left presents a synthesis face from full synthesis. Ours is presented in contrast to the responses of Llava-v1.5-7B (0 shot), Llava-v1.5B-7B (conditional fine-tune), and Chatgpt-4.5, respectively. The lower-right bracket provides the result annotations.

<!-- image -->

## 4 Experiment

## 4.1 Experimental Settings

Datasets. All facial samples in experiments were sourced from the VLF. The VLF dataset consists of 12 subsets, with each subset divided into training and test sets in a 4:1 ratio, as illustrated in Table 1.

Compared Baselines. We selected four types of models for evaluation: 1) Naive convolutional neural networks (CNNs): Xception [6], Resnet-50 [11]. 2) Typical frequency detectors: SPSL [26], F3Net[33], SRM[29], NPR[40]. 3) Typical Spatial detectors: GramNet[28], SAFE[20], CNNspot[43], DRCT [3]. 4) VLLM-based method:CLIPping [17], Llava-1.5-7B[25], Qwen2.5-VL7B[47], Llama3.2-11B-Vision[1].

Implementation Details. All experiments are based on the PyTorch and trained with 8 NVIDIA RTX L40. For training, we utilized the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2e-5 and a batch size of 128 for 3 epochs.

Table 2: Evaluation on Full Synthesis type. Results on different training and testing subsets using VLForgery. Accuracy is used for evaluation.

|              | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   | Full Synthesis(%) ↑   |          |
|--------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------|
| Train        | Non-existent          | Non-existent          | Non-existent          | Non-existent          | Non-existent          | Id-insertion          | Avg(%) ↑ |
|              | SDXL                  | SD2                   | SD3                   | Kandinsky2.2          | Flux                  | InstantID             |          |
| SDXL         | 99.35                 | 98.47                 | 96.02                 | 98.78                 | 98.7                  | 87.38                 | 96.45    |
| SD2          | 99.47                 | 99.97                 | 98.38                 | 99.40                 | 98.92                 | 80.67                 | 96.13    |
| SD3          | 99.65                 | 97.23                 | 99.98                 | 97.95                 | 99.70                 | 21.93                 | 86.07    |
| Kandinsky2.2 | 99.95                 | 99.37                 | 97.95                 | 99.95                 | 99.67                 | 93.75                 | 98.44    |
| Flux         | 98.01                 | 95.85                 | 98.10                 | 98.25                 | 100.00                | 48.10                 | 74.89    |
| InstantID    | 90.38                 | 87.05                 | 60.83                 | 87.40                 | 84.97                 | 92.97                 | 83.94    |

Table 3: Evaluation on Partial Synthesis type. Results on different training and testing subsets using VLForgery. Accuracy is used for evaluation.

| Train        | Partial Synthesis(%) ↑   | Partial Synthesis(%) ↑   | Partial Synthesis(%) ↑   | Avg(%) ↑   |
|--------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|------------|
|              | SDXL                     | SD2                      | Kandinsky2.2             | Avg(%) ↑   |
| SDXL         | 80.35                    | 68.78                    | 98.08                    | 82.40      |
| SD2          | 54.53                    | 61.77                    | 93.01                    | 69.77      |
| Kandinsky2.2 | 42.09                    | 34.20                    | 95.93                    | 57.41      |

## 4.2 Evaluation of Multi-task Forensics

## 4.2.1 Task1: Detecting the Authenticity of Faces

Table 4: Cross-generator dataset evaluation on ACC metric. All methods are trained on SDXL and evaluated on other subsets. ∗ indicates the use of trained models provided by the authors. Note that 'PS' means Partial Synthesis, and 'FS' means Full Synthesis.

| Type   | Method                       | Train-SDXL(%) ↑   | Train-SDXL(%) ↑   | SD2(%) ↑   | SD2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   | SD3(%) ↑   | Flux(%) ↑   | InstantID(%) ↑   | Avg(%) ↑   |
|--------|------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------|------------|---------------------|---------------------|------------|-------------|------------------|------------|
| Type   | Method                       | PS                | FS                | PS         | FS         | PS                  | FS                  | SD3(%) ↑   | Flux(%) ↑   | InstantID(%) ↑   | Avg(%) ↑   |
|        | Resnet-50[11]                | 35.09             | 99.73             | 11.87      | 95.67      | 58.40               | 97.37               | 90.58      | 94.03       | 94.58            | 75.26      |
|        | Xception[6]                  | 68.19             | 99.98             | 40.10      | 97.58      | 96.89               | 99.68               | 97.72      | 99.03       | 99.57            | 88.75      |
|        | SPSL[26]                     | 31.62             | 99.98             | 4.79       | 96.92      | 51.42               | 99.83               | 96.92      | 99.28       | 95.09            | 75.09      |
|        | F3Net[33]                    | 74.09             | 99.91             | 46.97      | 99.45      | 81.65               | 99.90               | 99.33      | 99.98       | 99.84            | 89.01      |
|        | SRM[29]                      | 59.21             | 99.95             | 12.30      | 98.65      | 98.34               | 99.57               | 98.43      | 98.17       | 97.06            | 84.63      |
|        | NPR[40]                      | 42.67             | 99.98             | 10.22      | 98.98      | 70.51               | 99.57               | 98.25      | 99.75       | 99.37            | 79.92      |
|        | GramNet[28]                  | 34.17             | 99.98             | 14.28      | 96.93      | 48.37               | 99.65               | 93.43      | 99.27       | 88.45            | 74.94      |
|        | SAFE[20]                     | 56.47             | 82.08             | 54.08      | 81.55      | 56.32               | 78.98               | 88.43      | 57.05       | 71.43            | 61.66      |
|        | CNNspot[43]                  | 26.30             | 97.93             | 9.04       | 73.00      | 26.97               | 74.12               | 39.95      | 70.00       | 73.60            | 54.55      |
|        | DRCT ∗ [3]                   | 57.65             | 99.41             | 58.52      | 97.71      | 99.33               | 99.92               | 65.97      | 59.06       | 98.92            | 81.83      |
|        | CLIPping Adapter [17]        | 36.29             | 99.91             | 32.13      | 94.37      | 75.04               | 98.38               | 98.58      | 97.95       | 97.05            | 81.03      |
|        | CLIPping Linear Probing [17] | 61.79             | 99.98             | 54.33      | 97.18      | 87.33               | 99.65               | 97.88      | 99.03       | 99.80            | 88.55      |
|        | Llava-1.5-7B[25]             | 69.92             | 99.92             | 51.07      | 99.97      | 99.56               | 99.74               | 97.66      | 99.12       | 99.69            | 87.07      |
|        | Qwen2.5VL-7B ∗ [ 47 ]        | 4.77              | 4.32              | 3.78       | 21.88      | 31.92               | 6.55                | 3.82       | 3.00        | 46.13            | 14.02      |
|        | Llama-3.2-11B-Vision ∗ [1]   | 53.46             | 64.97             | 52.13      | 68.95      | 58.42               | 69.63               | 47.80      | 63.05       | 58.49            | 59.66      |
|        | VLForgery (ours)             | 78.62             | 99.98             | 66.32      | 99.97      | 99.96               | 99.97               | 99.98      | 99.97       | 99.57            | 93.82      |

Table 5: Evaluation of falsified regions localization performance across distinct generators. Accuracy is used for evaluation.

| Train        | hair(%) ↑   | hair(%) ↑   | hair(%) ↑    | Avg(%) ↑   | brows(%) ↑   | brows(%) ↑   | brows(%) ↑   | Avg(%) ↑   | ears(%) ↑   | ears(%) ↑   | ears(%) ↑    | Avg(%) ↑   | nose(%) ↑   | nose(%) ↑   | nose(%) ↑    | Avg(%) ↑   |
|--------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|------------|
| Train        | SDXL        | SD2         | Kandinsky2.2 |            | SDXL         | SD2          | Kandinsky2.2 |            | SDXL        | SD2         | Kandinsky2.2 |            | SDXL        | SD2         | Kandinsky2.2 |            |
| SDXL         | 88.99       | 86.91       | 92.44        | 91.13      | 73.84        | 53.36        | 72.61        | 66.60      | 59.16       | 51.99       | 72.01        | 61.05      | 77.25       | 56.53       | 91.34        | 75.04      |
| SD2          | 79.68       | 82.63       | 85.42        | 82.58      | 65.38        | 62.64        | 66.84        | 64.95      | 40.30       | 50.33       | 52.66        | 47.76      | 58.46       | 75.45       | 86.67        | 73.53      |
| Kandinsky2.2 | 58.53       | 50.47       | 85.79        | 64.93      | 34.33        | 13.67        | 79.38        | 42.46      | 29.76       | 24.98       | 71.61        | 42.12      | 14.01       | 16.11       | 89.04        | 39.72      |

Intra-type performance with MLLMs. In this task, we first evaluate the Full Synthesis type performance with VLForgery. As shown in Table 2, the Full Synthesis type comprises two subtypes: Non-existent and Id-insertion. The non-existent face subtype consists of five distinct subsets, each corresponding to a specific generator. For the non-existent subtype, training and testing within each subset surpass 99.35% accuracy, while cross-subset testing achieves an average accuracy of 91.66%. Conversely, cross-subtype performance varies significantly. For instance, training on the Flux subset and testing on InstantID results in a classification accuracy drop to 48.1%.

Table 3 presents the performance evaluation of the Partial Synthesis type. This type consists of three subsets, each associated with a specific generator. Training was conducted on each of the three subsets, and testing was subsequently performed across all subsets. As indicated in Table 3, training on partial synthesis samples generated by SDXL-based models yields superior generalization performance.

Based on these observations, detectors trained with full-synthesis images are typically trained based on global features, focusing on the overall structure and content of the image. Also, they primarily focus on analyzing the integrity of the entire image. However, partial synthesis images often involve modifications to small areas of the image, and these details may not be obvious in the global features. Therefore, when these detectors encounter partial synthesis images with only a small local area tampered with, they may fail to capture the subtle changes, leading to a reduced recognition rate for local tampering.

Cross-Generator Faces Classification. We propose evaluating the generalization performance of distinct generators, encompassing both Full Synthesis and Partial Synthesis types. As illustrated in Table 4, all detectors were trained on samples with partial synthesis and full synthesis from the SDXL-based model, and subsequently tested on other subsets. For each compared method, we trained for 10 epochs and validated their performance on the final epoch. VLForgery exhibits a notable advantage, especially in accurately detecting partially synthesized face images

## 4.2.2 Task2: Locating the Falsified Regions

We evaluate the localization capabilities of VLForgery for four distinct regions ( i.e. , nose, brow, hair, and ears), as shown in Table 5. The Partial Synthesis type contains edited faces with single-edit and

Table 6: Evaluation of model's attribution accuracy on VLF.

| Method          |   FS_SDXL |   FS_SD2 |   FS_SD3 |   FS_IID |   FS_Kan2.2 |   FS_Flux |   PS_SDXL |   _PS_SD2 |   PS_Kan2.2 |   Avg. |
|-----------------|-----------|----------|----------|----------|-------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-------------|--------|
| resnet50        |     99.93 |    99.53 |    84.43 |    98.82 |       99.23 |     99.87 |     11.81 |      6.09 |       76.48 |  75.13 |
| xception        |     99.98 |    99.97 |    87.93 |    99.57 |       99.37 |     99.52 |     16.87 |     27.64 |       91.81 |  80.3  |
| efficientb4     |     99.99 |    99.88 |    88.93 |    98.15 |       98.95 |     99.9  |     27.61 |     27.85 |       81.43 |  80.29 |
| Guarnera et al. |     99.78 |    99.87 |    86.65 |    97.72 |       99.92 |     99.43 |     35.75 |     12.71 |       90.17 |  80.22 |
| VLForgery       |     93.27 |    92.47 |    93.24 |    90.42 |       89.13 |     82.43 |     63.64 |     60.2  |       73.45 |  82.03 |

Table 7: Ablation Study of the VLForgery's forgery description generation component in the detection task. 'VF', and 'EkCot' represent visual input features in forgery description generation, and extrinsic knowledge-guided chain-of-thought, respectively

|                   |    |       | Detection(%) ↑    | Detection(%) ↑   | Detection(%) ↑    | Detection(%) ↑   | Detection(%) ↑    | Detection(%) ↑   | Detection(%) ↑   | Detection(%) ↑   | Detection(%) ↑   |
|-------------------|----|-------|-------------------|------------------|-------------------|------------------|-------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Method            |    |       | SDXL              | SDXL             | SD2               | SD2              | Kandinsky2.2      | Kandinsky2.2     | SD3              | Flus             | InstantID        |
| Name              | VF | EKCot | Partial Synthesis | Full Synthesis   | Partial Synthesis | Full Synthesis   | Partial Synthesis | Full Synthesis   |                  |                  |                  |
| VariantA VariantB |    |       | 69.92             | 99.92            | 51.07             | 99.97            | 99.56             | 99.74            | 97.66            | 99.12            | 99.69            |
|                   |    | ✓     | 68                | 99.99            | 47.64             | 99.98            | 99.18             | 99.99            | 99.98            | 99.98            | 99.84            |
| Ours              | ✓  | ✓     | 78.62             | 99.98            | 66.32             | 99.97            | 99.96             | 99.97            | 99.98            | 99.97            | 99.57            |

Table 8: Ablation Study of the VLForgery's forgery description generation component in the localization task. 'VF', and 'EkCot' represent visual input features in forgery description generation, and extrinsic knowledge-guided chain-of-thought, respectively.

| Method   |          | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   | Localization(%) ↑   |
|----------|----------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
|          |          | hair                | hair                | hair                | brows               | brows               | brows               | ears                | ears                | ears                | nose                | nose                | nose                |
| Name     | VF EKCot | SDXL                | SD2                 | Kandinsky2.2        | SDXL                | SD2                 | Kandinsky2.2        | SDXL                | SD2 ↑               | Kandinsky2.2        | SDXL                | SD2                 | Kandinsky2.2        |
| VariantA |          | 54.41               | 55.06               | 59.49               | 38.63               | 33.10               | 46.76               | 22.56               | 18.44               | 30.46               | 38.63               | 28.10               | 42.82               |
| VariantB | ✓        | 88.77               | 78.51               | 97.48               | 66.09               | 39.44               | 75.61               | 45.25               | 34.86               | 74.56               | 40.36               | 46.95               | 96.13               |
| Ours     | ✓ ✓      | 88.99               | 86.91               | 92.44               | 73.84               | 53.36               | 72.61               | 59.16               | 51.99               | 72.01               | 77.25               | 56.53               | 91.34               |

multi-edit. Additionally, this type is categorized into three subtypes based on distinct generators. Each subtype was trained separately, and tested across all subtypes, with validation results tallied across the four facial regions. Note that, if a multi-edited face is detected with the result 'earAndnose', but the ground truth is 'earAndhair', the detection of the ear region is marked as correct, while the hair region is marked as incorrect.

Why Use Natural Language Instead of Masks for Localization Results? Fig. 4 illustrated a comparison of localization results between VLForgery and PSCC-Net (IFDL method). For subtle falsified facial regions, such as brows and nose, IFDL methods often struggle to identify them accurately, being easily influenced by extraneous features from the image background, which leads to incorrect localization. In contrast, for facial localization, where tampered areas are limited, VLForgey leverages natural language descriptions instead of mask images to reduce the difficulty of localization.

This approach significantly enhances localization accuracy and minimizes susceptibility to interference from background features. Furthermore, to quantify the performance gap in localization between ours and the IFDL method, we selected 1,000 samples from the Partial Synthesis test set. We used the IFDL method to generate mask images, which were then manually evaluated. A localization was deemed correct if any part of the manipulated area was slightly visible in the mask image; otherwise, it was considered incorrect. As shown in Table 9, our method demonstrates a clear advantage in accurately localizing manipulated regions.

Cross-Generator Falsified Region Localization. As observed in Table 5, localization

Figure 4: Comparative results of tamper facial localization capabilities between IFDL method and VLForgery. Both models were trained on partial synthesis generated by SDXL, and tested on Kandinsky2.2 samples. Mislocalized areas are marked in red.

<!-- image -->

accuracy for hair consistently remains the highest, followed by the nose, brows, and then the ears. For instance, when trained and tested on SDXL samples, the hair localization accuracy reached 88.99%. In contrast, localization accuracy for smaller regions, such as the ears, decreases to 59.16%.

Table 9: Evaluation of falsified regions localization performance across distinct generators with VLForgery and IFDL method.

| Method        | SD2(%) ↑   | SD2(%) ↑   | SD2(%) ↑   | SD2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   | Kandinsky2.2(%) ↑   |
|---------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Method        | hair       | brows      | ears       | nose       | hair                | brows               | ears                | nose                |
| PSCC-Net [27] | 53.57      | 39.47      | 41.20      | 29.73      | 60.71               | 68.42               | 63.16               | 44.44               |
| VLForgery     | 86.91      | 53.36      | 51.99      | 56.53      | 92.44               | 72.61               | 72.01               | 91.34               |

## 4.2.3 Task3:Attributing Source Models of Synthesis Faces

In this task, we focus on evaluating the VLForgery's capability to capture the synthesis semantic patterns of different generators. We fine-tuned VLForgery on the VLF training set, which includes all subsets, and tested its performance across each generator for the two synthesis types. As shown in Tab. 6, the attribution performance for full synthesis is superior, with an average accuracy of 91.71%. However, attribution accuracy for partial synthesis falls below 70%. We attribute this disparity to the detection difficulty of partial synthesis.

## 4.3 Ablation Study

Two main factors affect VLForgery forensics performance: (1) the impact of EkCot compared to outputting only forgery detection results, and (2) the influence of additional visual input features on forensics performance in EkCot. We conducted ablation studies for both detection and localization tasks. Table 7 presents the ablation results for the detection task, demonstrating a significant performance improvement in detecting partially synthesized images when using the EkCot. Table 8 displays the ablation results for the localization task, where the model's localization capability significantly decreased without EkCot. And compared to the forgery description generation method without visual assistance, the model performed better on SDXL and SD2 samples, though it showed some limitations on Kandinsky 2.2 generated samples.

## 4.4 Qualitative Study

The primary advantage of the multimodal large language models (MLLMs) is their flexible output, allowing them to provide a comprehensive analysis of the synthesized images. As shown in Fig. 3, we compared VLForgery with some existing MLLMs, demonstrating that VLForgery enables detailed capabilities, including forgery analysis, localization of falsified regions, and synthesis attribution.

## 5 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce VLForgery, a framework designed for AI-generated faces in fine-grained forensics scenarios. To address the lack of partially synthesized face datasets, we constructed VLF. Additionally, we introduce EkCot, which provides a fine-grained analysis of forgery artifacts. The satisfying performance of the proposed framework is justified by extensive evaluations.

## Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant U23B2022, U22B2047, 62262041, 62172402), the Shenzhen R&amp;D Program (Grant JCYJ20250604181211016, SYSPG20241211174032004), and the Jiangxi Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant 20232BAB202011).

We also sincerely thank Shu Hu, from the Department of Computer and Information Technology, Purdue University, IN, 46202, USA, for providing insightful advice and support during the preparation of this manuscript.

## References

- [1] Llama-3.2-11b-vision. In https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.
2. 2-11B-Vision-Instruct , 2024.
- [2] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18392-18402, 2023.

- [3] Baoying Chen, Jishen Zeng, Jianquan Yang, and Rui Yang. DRCT: Diffusion reconstruction contrastive training towards universal detection of diffusion generated images. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024.
- [4] Ruoxin Chen, Junwei Xi, Zhiyuan Yan, Ke-Yue Zhang, Shuang Wu, Jingyi Xie, Xu Chen, Lei Xu, Isabel Guan, Taiping Yao, et al. Dual data alignment makes ai-generated image detector easier generalizable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14359 , 2025.
- [5] Harry Cheng, Yangyang Guo, Tianyi Wang, Liqiang Nie, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Diffusion facial forgery detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15859 , 2024.
- [6] Francois Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Jul 2017.
- [7] Riccardo Corvi, Davide Cozzolino, Giada Zingarini, Giovanni Poggi, Koki Nagano, and Luisa Verdoliva. On the detection of synthetic images generated by diffusion models. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1-5. IEEE, 2023.
- [8] Bing Fan, Shu Hu, and Feng Ding. Synthesizing black-box anti-forensics deepfakes with high visual quality. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 4545-4549. IEEE, 2024.
- [9] Luca Guarnera, Oliver Giudice, and Sebastiano Battiato. Level up the deepfake detection: a method to effectively discriminate images generated by gan architectures and diffusion models. In Intelligent Systems Conference , pages 615-625. Springer, 2024.
- [10] Xiao Guo, Xiaohong Liu, Zhiyuan Ren, Steven Grosz, Iacopo Masi, and Xiaoming Liu. Hierarchical fine-grained image forgery detection and localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3155-3165, 2023.
- [11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Jun 2016.
- [12] Xinan He, Yue Zhou, Wei Ye, and Feng Ding. A3: Ambiguous aberrations captured via astray-learning for facial forgery semantic sublimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15173 , 2024.
- [13] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 , 2021.
- [14] Zhengchao Huang, Bin Xia, Zicheng Lin, Zhun Mou, and Wenming Yang. Ffaa: Multimodal large language model based explainable open-world face forgery analysis assistant. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10072 , 2024.
- [15] Shan Jia, Reilin Lyu, Kangran Zhao, Yize Chen, Zhiyuan Yan, Yan Ju, Chuanbo Hu, Xin Li, Baoyuan Wu, and Siwei Lyu. Can chatgpt detect deepfakes? a study of using multimodal large language models for media forensics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4324-4333, 2024.
- [16] Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6007-6017, 2023.
- [17] Sohail Ahmed Khan and Duc-Tien Dang-Nguyen. Clipping the deception: Adapting vision-language models for universal deepfake detection. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval , pages 1006-1015, 2024.
- [18] Max Ku, Tianle Li, Kai Zhang, Yujie Lu, Xingyu Fu, Wenwen Zhuang, and Wenhu Chen. Imagenhub: Standardizing the evaluation of conditional image generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01596 , 2023.
- [19] Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo. Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive facial image manipulation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020.
- [20] Ouxiang Li, Jiayin Cai, Yanbin Hao, Xiaolong Jiang, Yao Hu, and Fuli Feng. Improving synthetic image detection towards generalization: An image transformation perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06741 , 2024.

- [21] Tianle Li, Max Ku, Cong Wei, and Wenhu Chen. Dreamedit: Subject-driven image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12624 , 2023.
- [22] Yuezun Li, Xin Yang, Pu Sun, Honggang Qi, and Siwei Lyu. Celeb-df: A large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake forensics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3207-3216, 2020.
- [23] Li Lin, Neeraj Gupta, Yue Zhang, Hainan Ren, Chun-Hao Liu, Feng Ding, Xin Wang, Xin Li, Luisa Verdoliva, and Shu Hu. Detecting multimedia generated by large ai models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00045 , 2024.
- [24] Li Lin, Xin Wang, Shu Hu, et al. Ai-face: A million-scale demographically annotated ai-generated face dataset and fairness benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00783 , 2024.
- [25] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36, 2024.
- [26] Honggu Liu, Xiaodan Li, Wenbo Zhou, Yuefeng Chen, Yuan He, Hui Xue, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Spatial-phase shallow learning: rethinking face forgery detection in frequency domain. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 772-781, 2021.
- [27] Xiaohong Liu, Yaojie Liu, Jun Chen, and Xiaoming Liu. Pscc-net: Progressive spatio-channel correlation network for image manipulation detection and localization. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 32(11):7505-7517, 2022.
- [28] Zhengzhe Liu, Xiaojuan Qi, and Philip HS Torr. Global texture enhancement for fake face detection in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8060-8069, 2020.
- [29] Yuchen Luo, Yong Zhang, Junchi Yan, and Wei Liu. Generalizing face forgery detection with highfrequency features. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 16317-16326, 2021.
- [30] Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6038-6047, 2023.
- [31] Utkarsh Ojha, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Towards universal fake image detectors that generalize across generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 24480-24489, 2023.
- [32] Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings , pages 1-11, 2023.
- [33] Yuyang Qian, Guojun Yin, Lu Sheng, Zixuan Chen, and Jing Shao. Thinking in frequency: Face forgery detection by mining frequency-aware clues. In European conference on computer vision , pages 86-103. Springer, 2020.
- [34] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748-8763. PMLR, 2021.
- [35] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684-10695, 2022.
- [36] Andreas Rossler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Christian Riess, Justus Thies, and Matthias Niessner. Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Oct 2019.
- [37] Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22500-22510, 2023.
- [38] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2256-2265. PMLR, 2015.

- [39] Andreas Stöckl. Evaluating a synthetic image dataset generated with stable diffusion. In International Congress on Information and Communication Technology , pages 805-818. Springer, 2023.
- [40] Chuangchuang Tan, Yao Zhao, Shikui Wei, Guanghua Gu, Ping Liu, and Yunchao Wei. Rethinking the upsampling operations in cnn-based generative network for generalizable deepfake detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 28130-28139, 2024.
- [41] Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:19667-19679, 2020.
- [42] Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Haofan Wang, Zekui Qin, Anthony Chen, Huaxia Li, Xu Tang, and Yao Hu. Instantid: Zero-shot identity-preserving generation in seconds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07519 , 2024.
- [43] Sheng-Yu Wang, Oliver Wang, Richard Zhang, Andrew Owens, and Alexei A Efros. Cnn-generated images are surprisingly easy to spot... for now. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8695-8704, 2020.
- [44] Zhendong Wang, Jianmin Bao, Wengang Zhou, Weilun Wang, Hezhen Hu, Hong Chen, and Houqiang Li. Dire for diffusion-generated image detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 22445-22455, 2023.
- [45] Chen Henry Wu and Fernando De la Torre. A latent space of stochastic diffusion models for zero-shot image editing and guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 7378-7387, 2023.
- [46] Zhipei Xu, Xuanyu Zhang, Runyi Li, Zecheng Tang, Qing Huang, and Jian Zhang. Fakeshield: Explainable image forgery detection and localization via multi-modal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02761 , 2024.
- [47] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 , 2024.
- [48] Zheng Yang, Ruoxin Chen, Zhiyuan Yan, Ke-Yue Zhang, Xinghe Fu, Shuang Wu, Xiujun Shu, Taiping Yao, Shouhong Ding, and Xi Li. All patches matter, more patches better: Enhance ai-generated image detection via panoptic patch learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01396 , 2025.
- [49] Wei Ye, Xinan He, and Feng Ding. Decoupling forgery semantics for generalizable deepfake detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09739 , 2024.
- [50] Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
- [51] Lingzhi Zhang, Zhengjie Xu, Connelly Barnes, Yuqian Zhou, Qing Liu, He Zhang, Sohrab Amirghodsi, Zhe Lin, Eli Shechtman, and Jianbo Shi. Perceptual artifacts localization for image synthesis tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 7579-7590, 2023.
- [52] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3836-3847, 2023.
- [53] Yue Zhang, Ben Colman, Ali Shahriyari, and Gaurav Bharaj. Common sense reasoning for deep fake detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00126 , 2024.
- [54] Yue Zhou, Xinan He, KaiQing Lin, Bin Fan, Feng Ding, and Bin Li. Breaking latent prior bias in detectors for generalizable aigc image detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00874 , 2025.
- [55] Yue Zhou, Xinan He, Kaiqing Lin, Bing Fan, Feng Ding, Jinhua Zeng, and Bin Li. Brought a gun to a knife fight: Modern vfm baselines outgun specialized detectors on in-the-wild ai image detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12995 , 2025.
- [56] Mingjian Zhu, Hanting Chen, Qiangyu Yan, Xudong Huang, Guanyu Lin, Wei Li, Zhijun Tu, Hailin Hu, Jie Hu, and Yunhe Wang. Genimage: A million-scale benchmark for detecting ai-generated image. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
- [57] Xiaogang Zhu, Bo Lin, Xinan He, Jianfeng Xu, and Feng Ding. Tmfd: Two-stage meta-learning feature disentanglement framework for deepfake detection. In 2024 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB) , pages 1-8. IEEE, 2024.

## Structure of Contents

- Section A: Additional Introduction:
- -Section A.1: Limitations;
- -Section A.2: Future Works;
- Section B: Details of VLF Dataset Construction:
- -Section B.1: Details of Partial Synthesis Pipeline;
- -Section B.2: Details of Full Synthesis Pipeline;
- -Section B.3: Details of Attribute Dictionary;
- -Section B.4: Examples of VLF Dataset;
- Section C: Details of Low-Level Feature Comparison Pipeline:
- -Section C.1: Design of Low-Level Vision Prompt;
- -Section C.2: Analysis of Low-Level Vision Description;
- -Section C.3: Analysis of Low-Level Vision Bias;
- Section D: Full Experiment Result of VLF:
- -Section D.1: Quantitative Analysis of Results;
- -Section D.2: Experimental Results Supplement;
- Section E: Additional Information on VLForgery:
- -Section E.1: Details of the Fine-Tuning and Inference Modules;
- -Section E.2: Comparison of the Inference Result with Other MLLMs.

## A Additional Introduction

## A.1 Limitations

Most existing detectors for AI-generated content can achieve relatively good generalization on fully synthesized images with minimal training data. However, as discussed in the main text, we introduced additional samples in VLF partial synthesis. These samples incorporate real features from the pristine images to confuse detectors and evade detection. Even when these partially synthesized images are included in the training set, many binary classifiers still suffer from performance degradation. Although our VLF framework achieves the best generalization performance, it still falls short of our desired outcomes. Furthermore, the cross-generalization ability between different types of models, such as training on full synthesis and testing on traditional face-swapping deepfakes, is inherently limited due to differences in the generation processes. Enhancing generalization for more unknown generation methods remains a field worth exploring.

Moreover, for the VLF dataset, different generators and varying prompts may leave distinct forgery semantics. It is necessary to expand the dataset and evaluate the detection and generalization performance across these different forgery semantics.

## A.2 Future Works

First, we plan to expand the VLF dataset to encompass a broader range of forgery types, generators, and a more diverse and randomized set of semantic attributes. Second, we seek to enhance the model's generalization across varying forgery types by developing more robust model architectures and investigating more reliable techniques for generating forgery descriptions.

## B Details of VLF Dataset Construction

## B.1 Details of Partial Synthesis Pipeline

In this part, we define the pipeline for partial synthesis, which includes three steps: 1) Mask Preparation; 2) Prompt Design; 3) Image Generation.

Mask Preparation . To ensure the high quality of the partially synthesized images, we utilized the well-established facial dataset CelebAMask-HQ [19] as a data source since it already contains landmarks for various face attributes such as nose, brow, hair, ears, eyes, and teeth. However, to improve the robustness of our later fine-grained analysis framework for more highly realistic generated images, we only focus on nose, brow, hair, and ears landmarks since they can usually be

generated more realistically. Other attributes such as eyes and teeth, are often generated with more obvious artifacts like misaligned pupils or incorrectly positioned teeth, even with specific prompt design. Therefore, we ignore them during the generation phase but keep their original appearance in the generated image.

Prompt Design . For the selected attributes, we use GPT-4o to generate each facial attribute dictionary and prompt template. For each image, we randomly combine masks to generate masked faces. Therefore, each masked face may contain i ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } masks. Based on the generated masked face, we choose and combine templates for the corresponding attributes, then randomly select descriptive keywords from the relevant attribute dictionary to populate the templates, thereby generating the final prompt for image partial synthesis.

Image Generation . During the image generation phase, we input the generated masked face, corresponding final prompt, and pristine face into the Inpainting Generator to produce an inpainted face. For the Inpainting Generator, several widely used open-source models were selected: SDXL, SD2, and Kandinsky2.2. Furthermore, to better simulate real-world scenarios, certain forgery methods extract modified regions and overlay them onto the corresponding area of the pristine image, preserving the unedited portions of the original. These retained portions can then be leveraged to interfere with forensic detectors, thereby facilitating evasion. Consequently, we included this category of partial synthesis in our dataset.

## B.2 Details of Full Synthesis Pipeline

Prompt Design . With advancements in generative models, particularly text-guided models that now support longer input prompts to deliver more diverse outputs. In this context, we propose a semantic attribute dictionary, created with guidance from ChatGPT-4o, specifically designed to support the generating of realistic faces across diverse real-world scenarios. And, we further devised a corresponding prompt template, ( i.e. , Prompt Warehouse Template, as shown in Fig. 2(b, c)). By encompassing diverse real-world scenarios and stylistic elements, this template is structured to simulate realistic facial characteristics across varied photographic conditions.

Image Generation . We introduce two types of fully synthesized forgery: generating identity insertion (Fig. 2(b)) and non-existent faces (Fig. 2(c)). Both generation approaches utilize the same prompt template with slight modifications. In the face identity insertion pipeline, the objective is to preserve the original facial identity while situating it within a new scene. This pipeline initially uses a Face Feature Extractor to capture identity-specific features. These identity features are then integrated with the final prompt template and input into the ID-preserving Generator to produce the synthesized image. InstantID [42] was chosen as the model of choice, with all identities sourced from the CelebAMask-HQ [19] facial datasets. In the generation of non-existent faces, the diffusion model creates images of completely new faces that are unrelated to any existing individual based on a given prompt. In this case, the final prompt is created by randomly selecting keywords from the semantic attribute dictionary and inserting them into the prompt template, which then serves as the sole input to the Text-to-Image Generator. For the Text-to-Image Generator, we selected several open-source models that support extended text inputs, including Flux, SD3, Kandinsky2.2, SD2, and SDXL.

## B.3 Details of Attribute Dictionary

Facial Attribute Dictionary: For fine-grained facial manipulations, the dictionary mainly includes the following attributes:

- [size] : Defines the relative size of facial features.
- [shape] : Specifies the contour and structure of facial features.
- [color] : Describes the color characteristics of facial elements.
- [styles] : Indicates the stylistic choices applied to facial features.
- [description] : Provides a textual description of the face.
- [additional\_features] : Lists extra details, such as freckles, scars, wrinkles, or facial expressions, that add realism to the modifications.

The data source of the facial attribute dictionary is shown in Fig. B.1 (a).

Semantic Attribute Dictionary: For semantic attribute dictionary, including following attributes:

Figure B.1: The data source of facial attribute dictionary and semantic attribute dictionary.

<!-- image -->

- [style\_of\_photo] : Defines the overall stylistic direction of the image.
- [subject] : Specifies the characteristic attributes of the subject.
- [important\_feature] : Important attributes of the subject.
- [more\_details] : Further attributes of the subject.
- [pose\_or\_action] : Interaction between the subject and the scene.
- [framing] : Indicates whether body features are included.
- [lighting] : Lighting conditions in the scene.
- [camera\_angle] : Camera shooting angle.
- [camera\_properties] : Different parameters produce varying focus effects.
- [photographer] : Similar to camera parameters, the photographer's choices affect the presentation of the image.

The data source of each attribute is shown in Fig. B.1 (b).

## B.4 Examples of VLF Dataset

We selected a subset of samples from the VLF dataset and organized them by categorizing based on different generators and detailed characteristics.

Fig. B.2 illustrates the partial synthesis generated by different generators guided by the facial attribute dictionary.

Fig. B.3 illustrates the full synthesis generated by different generators guided by the semantic attribute dictionary.

## C Details of Low-Level Vision Comparison Pipeline

In this section, we elaborate on three aspects: low-level vision prompt design, low-level vision description analysis, and low-level vision bias analysis.

## C.1 Design of Low-Level Vision Prompt

Due to the high fidelity of existing DM-based images, it is challenging to explore subtle differences between them and real images from a purely visual perspective. However, images generated by different generators still exhibit certain common characteristics that distinguish them from real images. We refer to these characteristics as low-level vision biases.

One key challenge is determining the specific aspects in which these low-level vision biases manifest, such as lighting, noise, or color distribution. To address this, we investigate these biases from the following 10 low-level perspectives:

Figure B.2: Examples of Partial Synthesis in VLF.

<!-- image -->

Figure B.3: Examples of Full Synthesis in VLF.

<!-- image -->

## 10 Perspectives:

Are the edges sharp, blurry, or fragmented? Are the outlines complete or irregular? Are there any areas with particularly high or low edge density? Do the edges follow a specific direction (e.g., horizontal, vertical, diagonal)? Provide specific examples of edge and contour characteristics in different parts of the image.

Analyze the brightness and contrast of the image in detail. Is the image overall too bright, too dark, or well-balanced? Are there any areas with extreme highlights or shadows? Describe the distribution of contrast across the image. Are there any signs of overexposure or underexposure? Provide specific examples of brightness and contrast variations in different parts of the image.

Is the image overall sharp or blurry? If blurry, what type of blur is present (e.g., motion blur, Gaussian blur, defocus blur)? Are there specific areas that are more blurred than others? Compare the sharpness of different regions in the image. Provide specific examples of sharp and blurry areas.

What are the dominant colors, and how are they distributed across the image? Are the colors evenly distributed, or are there any anomalies like oversaturation, color distortion, or color blocks? Analyze the brightness and saturation of colors in different parts of the image. Provide specific examples of color characteristics and anomalies.

Are there any geometric distortions, such as stretching, warping, or asymmetry? Are there any compression artifacts, like blocky patterns or jagged edges? Analyze the symmetry of the image. Are there any unnatural deformations? Provide specific examples of distortions and anomalies in different parts of the image.

Is the image noisy? If so, what type of noise is present (e.g., Gaussian noise, salt-and-pepper noise, quantization noise)? Describe the intensity and distribution of noise across the image. Analyze the texture complexity-is it uniform or varied? Are there any directional patterns in the texture? Provide specific examples of noise and texture characteristics in different parts of the image.

Is the lighting uniform or uneven? Are the shadows natural and consistent with the lighting direction, or do they appear unnatural? Compare the highlights and shadows in different parts of the image. Are there any lighting anomalies, such as overly bright or dark areas? Provide specific examples of lighting and shadow characteristics.

Are the details rich and well-defined, or are they lacking? How does the resolution affect the clarity of the image? Are there any areas where details are particularly sharp or blurry? Check for any loss of detail in specific regions. Provide specific examples of detail and resolution characteristics.

"Are there any compression artifacts, sharpening artifacts, or color artifacts? Describe the location and intensity of these artifacts. Are there any signs of unnatural image processing? Identify any abnormal regions in the image and describe their characteristics. Provide specific examples of artifacts and anomalies.

Does the image have a high or low dynamic range? Is the tone mapping natural, or does it appear unnatural? Check how well the highlights and shadows retain details. Are there any tone mapping anomalies, such as clipped highlights or crushed shadows? Provide specific examples of dynamic range and tone mapping characteristics.

## Limit

Do not use relative terms like more, less, etc.

## Template

Compare the low-level visual features of image\_1 and image\_2. Focus on the following aspects for each image: [{Perspectives[idx]}]. Format your response as follows: - image\_1: [description], - image\_2: [description]. But note: {limit}.

Figure C.1: The details of the prompt template employed within the low-level vision comparison pipeline for the full synthesis.

- Edges and contours.
- Brightness and contrast.
- Blurriness and sharpness.
- Color distribution.
- Distortions and anomalies.
- Noise and texture.
- Lighting and shadows.
- Level of detail and resolution.
- Artifacts and anomalies.
- Dynamic range and tone mapping.

Based on these ten perspectives, we designed corresponding prompt templates. The low-level vision comparison prompt for full synthesis is shown in Fig. C.1.

Specifically, for partial synthesis, since we only need to explore the low-level differences between the synthesized regions and their corresponding real counterparts, we incorporate region-specific nouns as parameters in the prompt. The low-level vision comparison prompt for partially synthesized images is illustrated in Fig. C.2.

## C.2 Analysis of Low-Level Vision Description

To mitigate survivor bias and potential discrepancies in low-level vision bias across different generators, for each category of full synthesis samples, we generated 12,000 differential descriptions from 10 distinct low-level vision perspectives, resulting in a total of 120,000 differential descriptions per full synthesis subset. Subsequently, we selected compound nouns from the 12,000 descriptions for each perspective and calculated their frequency proportions. In addition, it is necessary to generate corresponding real-image low-level vision comparison descriptions based on the synthesis sample categories and subsequently calculate the frequency proportions of compound nouns.

Figure C.2: The details of the prompt template employed within the low-level vision comparison pipeline for the partial synthesis.

<!-- image -->

A simple example of the full synthesis samples in the SDXL category is illustrated in Fig. C.3. This image illustrate the proportion of compound nouns at the low-level vision perspective for edges and contours, with the upper-left image displaying the noun proportion ranking for synthesis, and the lower-left image showing the noun proportion ranking for real.

To identify the nouns that may serve as judgment biases for MLLMs, we computed the maximum differences in noun proportions between real and synthesis images, with the results presented in the right half of Fig. C.3. It is evident that, compared to the SDXL category of synthesis images, real images exhibit a 20% proportion of 'smooth outlines', 'well-defined contours', and 'noticeable fragmentation', while over 70% display 'low edge densities'. In contrast, synthesis images have less than 20% exhibiting 'low edge densities, but a significantly higher proportion of 'high edge densities', alongside low-level visual features, such as 'irregular outlines' and 'lower edge density', not present in real images.

Therefore, for synthesis images in SDXL category, the judgment biases derived from the low-level vision analysis at the edges and contours perspective are as follows: they are likely to exhibit features such as irregular outlines and lower edge density, and, in comparison to real images, they are more prone to display high edge density.

Asimple example of the partial synthesis samples in the SDXL category is illustrated in Fig. C.4 and Fig. C.5. Notably, for partial synthesis images, we generated differential descriptions from 10 distinct low-level vision perspectives for each of four selected regions, as outlined in Sec. B.1. For each category of partial synthesis images, a total of 480,000 differential descriptions were generated. We observed that even for partial synthesis derived from the same real, differences in the modified region led to slight differences in low-level vision bias. Therefore, in Fig. C.4 and Fig. C.5, we

Figure C.3: The low-level vision bias obtained after processing full synthesis images through the low-level comparison pipeline.

<!-- image -->

Figure C.4: The low-level vision bias obtained after processing hair-tampered images through the low-level comparison pipeline.

<!-- image -->

present the ranked data for two types of regions with significant size differences-hair ( i.e. , Fig. C.4) and brows ( i.e. , Fig. C.5) (low-level vision perspective: lighting and shadows).

It can be observed that even within the same low-level vision aspect, judgment bias varies significantly across different regions. For instance, in Fig. C.4, real images exhibit more pronounced characteristics in lighting and shadows perspective, such as 'overly bright areas', 'dark regions', and 'significant lighting anomalies' when compared to manipulated images with hair modifications. However, in Fig. C.5, real images compared to eyebrow-edited fake images display 'higher contrast', a 'more natural appearance', and 'multiple lighting angles'-features that are not observed in the manipulated images.

Figure C.5: The low-level vision bias obtained after processing brow-tampered images through the low-level comparison pipeline.

<!-- image -->

## C.3 Analysis of Low-Level Vision Bias

During the noun selection process, issues such as synonymy, ambiguous terms, and minimal proportions differences in noun characteristics between real and fake images often arise. Consequently, not every feature with a large proportional difference should be considered a judgment bias. For example, 'low edge density' and 'low edge densities' in Fig. C.3, as well as 'different parts' and 'left side' in Fig. C.4, illustrate such cases. Therefore, manual filtering is required to identify distinguishing low-level vision features that can effectively differentiate real from fake images.

In Fig. C.6, we demonstrate the process of applying the low-level vision comparison pipeline to a fake image generated by SDXL. The pipeline extracts low-level vision biases, which are then manually filtered to obtain the final judgment bias descriptors.

## D Full Experiment Result of VLF

This section provides a detailed description of all aspects involved in the experimental phase of the VLForgery framework, including the quantification of textual outputs, error analysis, additional metric evaluations, and extended experiments.

## D.1 Quantitative Analysis of Results

Table D.1: Error study.

| Name     | Train-SDXL% ↓   | Train-SDXL% ↓   | SD2% ↓   | SD2% ↓   | Kandinsky2.2% ↓   | Kandinsky2.2% ↓   | SD3% ↓   | Flux% ↓   | InstantID% ↓   | Avg% ↓   |
|----------|-----------------|-----------------|----------|----------|-------------------|-------------------|----------|-----------|----------------|----------|
| Name     | PS              | FS              | PS       | FS       | PS                | FS                | SD3% ↓   | Flux% ↓   | InstantID% ↓   | Avg% ↓   |
| VariantA | 0.00            | 0.00            | 0.00     | 0.00     | 0.00              | 0.00              | 0.00     | 0.00      | 0.00           | 0.00     |
| VariantB | 0.00            | 3.52            | 0.00     | 3.11     | 0.00              | 3.88              | 1.60     | 5.83      | 6.45           | 2.71     |

Result quantification: We employed regular expressions to filter MLLM outputs across multiple tasks. During testing, while the answers seemed correct, they did not always match the groundtruth due to issues like case mismatches ( e.g. , 'True' vs. 'true', 'Fake' vs. 'fake'). Although synonyms did occur ( e.g. , 'fake' vs. 'false'), such cases were extremely rare. To address this, we created a synonym pool and preprocessed the results. If the model's output matched an entry in the synonym pool, we considered it correct ( e.g. , 'false' was treated as 'fake').

Error Analysis: To address the inconsistency in detection results, we analyzed two key issues: 1. Variant A: Mismatch between authenticity judgment and forgery type (e.g., detected as 'real' but labeled as 'full synthesis'). 2. Variant B: Mismatch between forgery type and falsified region (e.g., labeled as 'full synthesis' but falsified region is 'hair'). The results are shown in Tab D.1.

## D.2 Experimental Results Supplement

Comparative Analysis of Single and Multi-edited Images. Given that multi-edited faces may disturb the detector's judgment, we divided the test data for each region into single-edited and multi-edited groups. We fine-tuned VLForgery on SDXL partial synthesis and subsequently tested it on both single-edited and multi-edited faces across four regions' test sets. As shown in Fig. D.1, we visualized the localization results of these two groups for four regions, respectively.

The results reveal that, although localization difficulty varies across regions, single-edit images are generally easier to locate compared to multi-edit images.

Additional metrics for evaluation. We introduce two additional metrics, F1 and Precision, to comprehensively evaluate the detection performance of different models. Tab. D.2 illustrates the precision performance of different models across various subset test sets, while Tab. D.3 demonstrates their F1 performance on the same subsets.

## E Additional Information on VLForgery

In this section, we present all additional details related to the VLForgery framework that were not covered in previous sections. These include the prompt design, question formulation, and inference result examples used in the fine-tuning and inference modules of MLLMs; the full low-level vision

Top 10 Features with Largest Percentage Differences

Percentage (%)

Figure C.6: The process of manually extracting final judgment bias descriptors from low-level vision bias

<!-- image -->

Figure D.1: Visualization of model's localization accuracy on single-edited and multi-edited faces. The Large ACC area means better localization capability.

<!-- image -->

Table D.2: Precision.

| Method           | Train-SDXL ↑   | Train-SDXL ↑   | SD2 ↑   | SD2 ↑   | Kandinsky2.2 ↑   | Kandinsky2.2 ↑   | SD3 ↑   | Flux ↑   | InstantID ↑   | Avg ↑   |
|------------------|----------------|----------------|---------|---------|------------------|------------------|---------|----------|---------------|---------|
| Method           | PS             | FS             | PS      | FS      | PS               | FS               | SD3 ↑   | Flux ↑   | InstantID ↑   | Avg ↑   |
| Resnet-50        | 90.77          | 89.82          | 76.88   | 89.43   | 94.24            | 89.6             | 88.9    | 89.27    | 77.71         | 87.4    |
| Xception         | 79.83          | 64.69          | 69.94   | 64.14   | 84.9             | 64.62            | 64.17   | 64.47    | 43.19         | 66.66   |
| SPSL             | 90.1           | 90.08          | 57.95   | 89.8    | 93.67            | 90.07            | 89.8    | 90.02    | 78.26         | 85.53   |
| DRCT ∗           | 86.7           | 78.02          | 86.87   | 77.73   | 91.83            | 78.11            | 70.2    | 67.84    | 59.55         | 77.38   |
| NPR              | 65.52          | 58.43          | 31.27   | 58.19   | 75.84            | 58.33            | 58.01   | 58.38    | 36.8          | 55.64   |
| CLIPping Adapter | 53.45          | 49.96          | 50.42   | 48.54   | 70.37            | 49.58            | 49.63   | 49.47    | 28.78         | 50.02   |
| CLIPping LP      | 66.4           | 50.25          | 63.48   | 49.54   | 73.64            | 50.16            | 49.72   | 50.01    | 29.58         | 53.64   |
| SRM              | 69.34          | 54.66          | 31.96   | 54.33   | 78.97            | 54.56            | 54.28   | 54.21    | 32.78         | 53.9    |
| F3Net            | 91.40          | 81.91          | 87.08   | 81.84   | 92.14            | 81.91            | 81.82   | 81.92    | 65.34         | 82.81   |
| GramNet          | 87.42          | 86.52          | 74.38   | 86.16   | 90.77            | 86.48            | 85.71   | 86.44    | 70.29         | 83.80   |
| SAFE             | 61.92          | 42.73          | 60.89   | 42.58   | 61.85            | 41.8             | 44.57   | 34.15    | 21.3          | 45.75   |
| CNNspot          | 91.4           | 92.59          | 78.5    | 90.3    | 91.59            | 90.43            | 83.59   | 89.93    | 79.64         | 87.55   |
| VLForgery        | 91.41          | 81.04          | 89.98   | 81.03   | 93.12            | 81.03            | 81.04   | 81.03    | 63.94         | 82.62   |

Table D.3: F1.

| Method           | Train-SDXL ↑   | Train-SDXL ↑   | SD2 ↑   | SD2 ↑   | Kandinsky2.2 ↑   | Kandinsky2.2 ↑   | SD3 ↑   | Flux ↑   | InstantID ↑   | Avg ↑   |
|------------------|----------------|----------------|---------|---------|------------------|------------------|---------|----------|---------------|---------|
| Method           | PS             | FS             | PS      | FS      | PS               | FS               | SD3 ↑   | Flux ↑   | InstantID ↑   | Avg ↑   |
| Resnet-50        | 50.61          | 94.52          | 20.56   | 92.45   | 72.11            | 93.32            | 89.73   | 91.59    | 85.32         | 76.69   |
| Xception         | 73.55          | 78.56          | 50.98   | 77.4    | 90.5             | 78.41            | 77.47   | 78.1     | 60.25         | 73.91   |
| SPSL             | 46.81          | 94.77          | 8.85    | 93.22   | 66.39            | 94.7             | 93.22   | 94.42    | 85.86         | 75.36   |
| DRCT ∗           | 69.25          | 87.43          | 69.93   | 86.58   | 95.43            | 87.68            | 68.02   | 63.15    | 74.34         | 77.98   |
| NPR              | 51.68          | 73.76          | 15.41   | 73.29   | 73.08            | 73.57            | 72.95   | 73.65    | 53.71         | 62.34   |
| CLIPping Adapter | 43.23          | 66.61          | 39.25   | 64.1    | 72.63            | 65.93            | 66.02   | 65.73    | 44.4          | 58.66   |
| CLIPping LP      | 64.01          | 66.88          | 58.55   | 65.62   | 79.9             | 66.73            | 65.94   | 66.46    | 45.63         | 64.41   |
| SRM              | 63.87          | 70.67          | 17.76   | 70.07   | 87.6             | 70.5             | 69.97   | 69.85    | 49.01         | 63.26   |
| F3Net            | 81.84          | 90.02          | 61.02   | 89.79   | 86.58            | 90.01            | 89.73   | 90.05    | 78.99         | 84.23   |
| GramNet          | 49.13          | 92.77          | 23.96   | 91.23   | 63.11            | 92.6             | 89.4    | 92.41    | 78.33         | 74.77   |
| SAFE             | 59.07          | 56.21          | 57.28   | 55.94   | 58.96            | 54.66            | 59.27   | 42.73    | 32.81         | 52.99   |
| CNNspot          | 40.85          | 95.18          | 16.21   | 80.73   | 41.67            | 81.47            | 54.06   | 78.72    | 76.5          | 62.82   |
| VLForgery        | 84.53          | 89.52          | 76.36   | 89.51   | 96.42            | 89.51            | 89.52   | 89.51    | 77.87         | 86.97   |

bias results from the low-level vision comparison pipeline; as well as comparative examples of inference results from other multimodal language models.

## E.1 Details of the Fine-Tuning and Inference Modules

This section describes the fine-tuning and inference module and the various templates required for EkCot generation.

Fig. E.1 outlines the specific contents of the general rule template involved in the description generation module. The templates incorporate additional knowledge, such as ground truth and low-level vision bias, represented by specific placeholders. For example, 'detection\_result' indicates whether the image is real or fake, 'text\_prompt' represents the prompt used during the image generation process, and 'judgmentbias' denotes the low-level vision judgment bias knowledge required for analysis.

Fig. E.2 illustrates all the question formats randomly generated by GPT-4o for the final fine-tuning dataset.

## E.2 Comparison of the Inference Result with Other MLLMs

We randomly selected three representative samples of forged images, each corresponding to a distinct type of forgery, and demonstrated the reasoning outcomes generated by our framework in comparison to those produced by other open-source Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Fig. E.3 presents the analysis results generated by different reasoning models for a synthetic image created through identity insertion. Fig. E.4 presents the analysis results generated by different reasoning models for a synthetic image created through sdxl model. Fig. E.5 presents the analysis results

Figure E.1: Specific details of the General Rule Template used in the forgery description module.

<!-- image -->

generated by different reasoning models for a partial synthetic image created through sdxl-inpainting model.

Figure E.2: Randomly generated question descriptions using ChatGPT-4o.

<!-- image -->

Figure E.3: Comparison of responses to the full synthesis between other widely used MLLMs and the VLForgery framework. The sample shown is an identity insertion face generated by the InstantID model.

<!-- image -->

Figure E.4: Comparison of responses to the full synthesis between other widely used MLLMs and the VLForgery framework. The sample shown is a non-existent face generated by the flux model.

<!-- image -->

Figure E.5: Comparison of responses to the partial synthesis between other widely used MLLMs and the VLForgery framework. The sample shown is a hair-edited face generated by the sdxl model.

<!-- image -->

## NeurIPS Paper Checklist

## 1. Claims

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper's contributions and scope?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification:

[TODO]

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper.
- The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
- The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
- It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper.

## 2. Limitations

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. A.1.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
- The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
- The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
- The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
- The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
- The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size.
- If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness.
- While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren't acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

## 3. Theory assumptions and proofs

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof?

Answer:

[TODO]

Justification: [TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
- All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and crossreferenced.
- All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
- The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition.
- Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
- Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

## 4. Experimental result reproducibility

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. 4.1.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not.
- If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
- Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
- While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example
- (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.
- (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully.
- (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).
- (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

## 5. Open access to data and code

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?

Answer:

[TODO]

Justification:

[TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
- Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so 'No' is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).
- The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
- The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
- At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable).
- Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

## 6. Experimental setting/details

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. 4.1.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
- The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

## 7. Experiment statistical significance

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. D.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.
- The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).
- The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
- The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
- It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.

- It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.
- For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).
- If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

## 8. Experiments compute resources

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. 4.1.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
- The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
- The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn't make it into the paper).

## 9. Code of ethics

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification:

[TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
- If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics.
- The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

## 10. Broader impacts

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. 1.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
- If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
- Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
- The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to

generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.

- The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
- If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

## 11. Safeguards

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)?

Answer:

[TODO]

Justification:

[TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
- Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
- Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
- We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.

## 12. Licenses for existing assets

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification:

[TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
- The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
- The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
- The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
- For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided.
- If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
- For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
- If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset's creators.

## 13. New assets

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Refer to Sec. E.

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
- Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc.
- The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used.
- At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

## 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)?

Answer:

[TODO]

Justification:

[TODO]

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper.
- According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.

## 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?

Answer:

[TODO]

Justification:

[TODO]

## Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper.
- We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution.
- For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

## 16. Declaration of LLM usage

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.

Answer:

[TODO]

## Justification: [TODO]

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
- Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described.