## LVLM-Driven Attribute-Aware Modeling for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification

Zhiqi Pang 1

Lingling Zhao 1

Junjie Wang 2

1 Harbin Institute of Technology, China

2 Nanjing Medical University, China zqpang98@gmail.com, zhaoll@hit.edu.cn, junjiehit@163.com, chunyu@hit.edu.cn

## Abstract

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims to match visible and infrared images of the same individual. Supervised VI-ReID (SVI-ReID) methods have achieved promising performance under the guidance of manually annotated identity labels. However, the substantial annotation cost severely limits their scalability in real-world applications. As a result, unsupervised VI-ReID (UVI-ReID) methods have attracted increasing attention. These methods typically rely on pseudo-labels generated by clustering and matching algorithms to replace manual annotations. Nevertheless, the quality of pseudo-labels is often difficult to guarantee, and low-quality pseudo-labels can significantly hinder model performance improvements. To address these challenges, we explore the use of attribute arrays extracted by a large vision-language model (LVLM) to enhance VI-ReID, and propose a novel LVLM-driven attribute-aware modeling (LVLM-AAM) approach. Specifically, we first design an attribute-aware reliable labeling strategy, which refines intra-modality clustering results based on image-level attributes and improves inter-modality matching by grouping clusters according to cluster-level attributes. Next, we develop an explicit-implicit attribute fusion module, which integrates explicit and implicit attributes to obtain more fine-grained identity-related text features. Finally, we introduce an attribute-aware contrastive learning module, which jointly leverages static and dynamic text features to promote modality-invariant feature learning. Extensive experiments conducted on VI-ReID datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed LVLM-AAM and its individual components. LVLM-AAM not only significantly outperforms existing unsupervised methods but also surpasses several supervised methods.

## 1 Introduction

Person re-identification (ReID) [45, 2, 4, 57, 34, 25, 10, 35] focuses on identifying images of a specific person from a large-scale gallery. To advance intelligent surveillance systems across various time periods, visible-infrared ReID (VI-ReID) [31, 46, 42, 22, 9] was introduced, aiming to match visible and infrared images of the same person. While supervised VI-ReID (SVI-ReID) methods [43, 51, 7, 50] have shown promising performance on multiple datasets, they heavily rely on manually annotated identity labels in the training set. However, manually annotating data for VI-ReID tasks is an extremely labor-intensive process. As a result, increasing attention has been given to unsupervised VI-ReID (UVI-ReID) [21, 38, 32, 36, 37, 29, 30, 33]. These UVI-ReID methods typically begin by clustering image features extracted by an image encoder to generate intra-modality pseudo-labels. They then perform inter-modality matching to generate inter-modality pseudo-labels. These intramodality and inter-modality pseudo-labels serve as supervisory signals to replace manual labels, thus reducing the limitations imposed by the high cost of annotation.

∗ Corresponding author: Chunyu Wang

Chunyu Wang 1 ∗

Figure 1: The differences between existing methods and LVLM-AAM are highlighted with red lines. Different feature colors indicate different pseudo-labels. (a) The texts are entirely derived from pseudo-labels without enhancing the quality of the pseudo-labels. Moreover, these texts are only utilized for optimization within their corresponding modality. (b) LVLM-AAM leverages attribute arrays provided by an LVLM to simultaneously enhance intra-modality pseudo-labels, inter-modality matching (pseudo-labels), and texts. Furthermore, the text semantics can be mutually transferred between modalities during the optimization process. We define a correct match as two clusters from different modalities that contain images of the same identity, and an incorrect match otherwise.

<!-- image -->

However, the quality of pseudo-labels generated by clustering algorithms is largely constrained by the performance of the pretrained image encoder, and the global-level inter-modality matching often leads to mutual interference, resulting in cascading errors [32]. Although CLIP-based UVI-ReID methods [3] attempt to leverage the pretrained CLIP model to obtain text semantics as additional supervision signals, as shown in Figure 1a, two critical limitations still remain: (1) The texts are constructed based on pseudo-labels generated by clustering algorithms, thus inherently carrying similar supervision signals without fundamentally improving the pseudo-labels. (2) This method typically utilizes text semantics only to optimize features within the corresponding modality, focusing on enhancing intra-modality identity discrimination, but without explicitly assisting the image encoder in learning modality-invariant features.

Inspired by the powerful fine-grained vision-language understanding capability of the large visionlanguage model (LVLM) [1], we attempt to leverage attribute arrays extracted by an LVLM to improve VI-ReID, as illustrated in Figure 1b. We propose a novel LVLM-driven attribute-aware modeling (LVLM-AAM) method to address the aforementioned two problems. To tackle the first issue, we first employ an LVLM to extract attribute arrays (Gender, Upper, Lower, Glasses, and Backpack) for each image in the training set, which are referred to as explicit attributes in the following descriptions. Then, we design an attribute-aware reliable labeling (ARL) strategy, which consists of attribute-aware refinement (AR) and attribute-aware matching (AM). Specifically, AR refines intra-modality clustering results based on image-level attribute arrays, while AM groups clusters based on cluster-level attribute arrays to enhance inter-modality matching. Subsequently, we develop an explicit-implicit attribute fusion (EAF) module, which fuses implicit attributes (text embeddings) and explicit attributes to obtain more fine-grained identity-related text features. To address the second issue, we further propose attribute-aware contrastive learning (AAC), which not only computes dynamic text features based on static text features, but also optimizes with both static and dynamic features to enhance modality-invariant feature learning.

It is worth noting that, since LVLM-AAM leverages supervision information (i.e., attribute arrays) extracted from an LVLM, it may not be considered a fully UVI-ReID method. In other words, the primary goal of this work is to explore the effectiveness of utilizing an LVLM to advance the practical application of UVI-ReID - specifically, to improve recognition performance while maintaining low manual annotation costs. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:

- We explore the use of attribute arrays extracted by an LVLM to improve VI-ReID and propose a novel LVLM-AAM method, which leverages attribute arrays to refine pseudolabels and text semantics for enhanced modality-invariant feature learning.
- We design an ARL strategy and an EAF module. The former refines intra-modality and inter-modality pseudo-labels based on image-level and cluster-level attributes, respectively, while the latter utilizes attribute arrays to generate fine-grained text features.

- We develop an AAC module, which computes dynamic text features based on static text features from both modalities, and optimizes with both static and dynamic features to further enhance modality-invariant learning.
- Extensive experiments conducted on VI-ReID datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed LVLM-AAM and its components. LVLM-AAM not only significantly outperforms existing unsupervised methods but also surpasses several supervised methods.

## 2 Related Work

Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification. Given an infrared image of a person, VI-ReID [31, 46, 42, 22, 9] aims to retrieve the corresponding visible image from a large-scale gallery, and vice versa. Early studies primarily focused on the supervised VI-ReID (SVI-ReID) [43, 51, 7, 53] setting, where manual annotations were used to guide the learning process and reduce the impact of modality gap. Although SVI-ReID methods have demonstrated promising recognition capabilities, they are constrained by the high cost of manual annotations. As a result, increasing attention has been directed toward the unsupervised VI-ReID (UVI-ReID) setting. For instance, H2H [21], as one of the early UVI-ReID approaches, first pretrains the image encoder on a manually labeled visible dataset [54], and then performs unsupervised learning on a visible-infrared dataset. ADCA [38] further eliminates the reliance on manual annotations for pretraining by first conducting homogeneous learning within each modality, followed by heterogeneous learning through inter-modality matching. Building upon ADCA, PGM [32] introduces a graph matching strategy to globally establish inter-modality positive clusters. Among recent methods, SDCL [37] enhances model optimization by exploring the relationships between shallow and deep features within the Transformer architecture [5, 14], providing abundant supervisory signals. PCLHD [30] introduces hard prototypes to supply diverse supervisory signals for optimization. Although existing UVI-ReID approaches have made significant efforts to obtain diverse and reliable supervision, these methods primarily rely on image feature distances or similarities. In contrast to previous work, we go beyond purely image-based features by leveraging attribute arrays extracted by the LVLM as additional supervisory signals to improve VI-ReID performance.

Vision-Language Models. Powered by large-scale pretraining, vision-language models (VLMs) [27, 56] have demonstrated strong vision-language understanding capabilities and achieved competitive performance across various downstream tasks in computer vision. CLIP [27], as a representative work in the VLMs domain, typically consists of an image encoder and a text encoder. Given an input image-text pair, CLIP [27] aims to predict their similarity. Subsequent research, such as CoOp [56], enhances the flexibility of CLIP [27] by learning a set of task-specific text embeddings for each image category in downstream tasks. Inspired by the success of VLMs, researchers in the ReID community have also begun exploring VLMs-based approaches. For instance, CLIP-ReID [18] leverages text semantics by learning a set of text embeddings for each identity to assist the image encoder in extracting identity-related features. TVI-LFM [15] utilizes text descriptions of visible images to augment the corresponding infrared images of the same identity, thereby improving visible-infrared retrieval performance. In contrast to the aforementioned supervision methods, CCLNet [3] in the UVI-ReID field learns a set of text embeddings for each intra-modality pseudo-label obtained by clustering, and uses the optimized text embeddings as supervisory signals to enhance intra-cluster compactness. However, existing UVI-ReID approaches face two key limitations: (1) the optimized text embeddings provide supervision signals similar to the original pseudo-labels, without substantially improving the quality of the pseudo-labels; (2) the optimized text embeddings are solely used to promote intra-modality identity learning, without explicitly assisting the model in learning modality-invariant features. To address these issues, our proposed LVLM-AAM method leverages attribute arrays to refine intra-modality and inter-modality pseudo-labels and jointly utilizes both explicit and implicit attributes to promote modality-invariant feature learning.

## 3 The Proposed Method

## 3.1 Task Formulation and Method Overview

In the UVI-ReID task, we are provided with an unlabeled training set consisting of a visible image set { x v i } N v i =1 and an infrared image set { x r i } N r i =1 . Our goal is to train an image encoder capable of

Figure 2: Illustration of our LVLM-AAM. The different colors of the features represent different pseudo-labels, while different shapes denote different modality labels.

<!-- image -->

extracting modality-invariant and identity-discriminative features. Before optimizing the image encoder, we utilize an LVLM [1] to extract a five-value attribute array for each image in { x v i } N v i =1 and { x r i } N r i =1 . Specifically, we first prompt the LVLM [1] to respond in the following format: 'Gender: [male/female],' 'Glasses: [wearing/without],' 'Backpack: [carrying/without],' 'Upper: [clothing type],' and 'Lower: [clothing type].' The detailed prompt can be found in Supplementary Material Section S.I. Subsequently, we arrange the extracted attribute values in the order of Gender, Glasses, Backpack, Upper, and Lower, obtaining a five-value attribute array for each image (e.g., ['male', 'without', 'carrying', 'shirt', 'shorts']). In the following descriptions, we refer to these arrays as explicit attributes to distinguish them from implicit attributes (i.e., text embeddings).

As shown in Figure 2, the proposed LVLM-driven attribute-aware modeling (LVLM-AAM) method first employs an attribute-aware reliable labeling (ARL) strategy, which consists of an attribute-aware refinement (AR) module and an attribute-aware matching (AM) module, to obtain reliable intramodality and inter-modality pseudo-labels, respectively. Meanwhile, an explicit-implicit attribute fusion (EAF) module is introduced, which leverages both explicit and implicit attributes along with a pretrained CLIP [27] model consisting of a text encoder and an image encoder to generate fine-grained text features. Finally, LVLM-AAM adopts an attribute-aware contrastive learning (AAC) module to generate dynamic text features, thereby guiding the image encoder to learn identity-discriminative and modality-invariant features.

## 3.2 Attribute-Aware Reliable Labeling

Attribute-Aware Refinement. We first input the visible image set { x v i } N v i =1 and the infrared image set { x r i } N r i =1 into the image encoder to obtain the visible feature set { f v i } N v i =1 and the infrared feature set { f r i } N r i =1 . Then, we apply the DBSCAN algorithm [6] to perform clustering within both the visible and infrared modalities to obtain intra-modality pseudo-labels. Next, for any given cluster (pseudo-label), we determine the mode of attribute array values at each position across all attribute arrays within the cluster. In each cluster, these five mode values are then aggregated to formulate a cluster-level attribute array. From the perspective of ensemble learning [17, 41], the mode-based cluster-level attribute array better reflects the overall characteristics of the cluster than a single image-level attribute array. Therefore, we use the cluster-level attribute array to refine the images within the cluster by excluding those that deviate significantly from the cluster-level attribute array. Specifically, we identify image-level attribute arrays that differ from the cluster-level attribute array by more than η values as outliers and exclude the corresponding images. Ultimately, we obtain the refined clustering results (pseudo-labels), which are used for intra-modality contrastive learning.

Attribute-Aware Matching. Existing inter-modality matching methods [32, 3, 30] typically perform matching at a global level. However, global cluster matching often leads to cascading errors due to mutual interference among clusters. Fortunately, the introduction of cluster-level attributes provides a foundation for more fine-grained inter-modality matching. Specifically, we group clusters based on the first three attribute values in their cluster-level attribute arrays. For example, clusters

with the first three attributes as 'male,' 'without,' and 'carrying' are grouped together, while those with 'male,' 'wearing,' and 'carrying' are placed in a different group. In this work, we obtain a total of eight groups, with each group containing both visible and infrared clusters. During the inter-modality matching process, we perform progressive graph matching [32] within each group to generate inter-modality pseudo-labels. The detailed matching process is provided in Supplementary Material Section S.II.

We use all attributes in the attribute-aware refinement module for outlier detection to align with a realistic perceptual principle: evaluating an object from more dimensions (attributes) is generally more accurate and comprehensive than doing so from fewer dimensions. We restrict attribute-aware matching to the first three attributes because they have countable value spaces, which ensures that each group contains both visible and infrared clusters.

## 3.3 Intra-Inter Modality Contrastive Learning

Intra-Modality Contrastive Learning. Within each modality, we compute the cluster centers based on the refined clustering results. For example, the center of the p -th cluster in the visible modality is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f v i denotes an image feature within the cluster, and N v p represents the number of images in the cluster. The center of the p -th cluster in the infrared modality, denoted as c r p , is computed in a similar manner. Finally, we introduce the intra-modality contrastive loss to encourage the image encoder to learn identity-discriminative features. For example, for any image feature f v i in the visible modality, the intra-modality contrastive loss is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c v p denotes the center of the cluster to which f v i belongs, C v is the total number of clusters in the visible modality at the current epoch, and τ is the temperature hyperparameter. The intra-modality contrastive loss for the infrared modality, denoted as L r intra , is computed in a similar manner. Thus, the total intra-modality contrastive loss is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Attribute-aware refinement and intra-modality contrastive learning are iteratively performed, and the final intra-modality pseudo-labels are preserved.

Inter-Modality Contrastive Learning. We optimize the image encoder based on the inter-modality pseudo-labels (matches) obtained from attribute-aware matching. For example, for any visible feature f v i , the inter-modality contrastive loss is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c r p denotes the center of the infrared cluster matched to the cluster to which f v i belongs, C r is the number of clusters in the infrared modality at the current epoch, and τ is a temperature hyperparameter. Similarly, the inter-modality contrastive loss L r inter for infrared features can be defined in the same way. Following the alternate cross contrastive learning scheme [32], the overall inter-modality contrastive loss is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where epoch represents the index of the current epoch.

## 3.4 Explicit-Implicit Attribute Fusion

After the iterative execution of attribute-aware refinement and intra-modality contrastive learning, we assign to each cluster a text containing learnable text embeddings ' [ X 1 ] [ X 2 ] . . . . . . [ X M ] ' in the format 'An image of a [ X 1 ] [ X 2 ] . . . . . . [ X M ] [ male/female ] [ wearing/without ] glasses and [ carrying/without ] a backpack.' Here, M represents the number of learnable text embeddings, and [ male/female ] , [ wearing/without ] , and [ carrying/without ] correspond to the first three attribute values from the cluster-level attribute array of the respective cluster. By incorporating both explicit and implicit attributes, we enrich the semantic content of the text.

Subsequently, we input the image and its corresponding text into the pretrained CLIP [27] image and text encoders, respectively, to obtain the image features f s p and text features t s p . Following existing optimization strategies, we freeze the pretrained CLIP [27] image and text encoders and introduce the CLIP contrastive loss [3] to optimize the learnable text embeddings:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where s ∈ { v, r } denotes the index for the visible or infrared modality, and f s p and t s p represent the image and text features with the same pseudo-label. B refers to the batch size, and P t p is the set of image features in the batch that share the same pseudo-label as t s p . Finally, we refer to the converged text features as the static text features .

## 3.5 Attribute-Aware Contrastive Learning

Although the static text features contain identity-related semantic information, they are modalitydependent. Therefore, to leverage the text features for promoting modality-invariant learning, we first obtain dynamic text features based on the static text features following attribute-aware matching. For example, for the p -th cluster in the visible modality, its dynamic text feature is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t v p and t r p represent the static text features of the cluster and its matching cluster in the infrared modality, respectively. α is the weight hyperparameter. The dynamic text features in the infrared modality are computed using a similar approach. The dynamic text feature incorporates information from both the visible and infrared modalities, and thus tends to be more modality-invariant compared to the static text features. Moreover, since the dynamic text feature is derived from two static text features that share the same inter-modality pseudo-label, it also retains identity-related information.

Subsequently, we introduce a text semantic contrastive loss to promote modality-invariant learning. For any image feature f s p , the text semantic contrastive loss is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ t s p represents the dynamic text feature corresponding to f s p , and Q s denotes the set of all static text features in the modality to which f s p belongs.

In summary, the total loss used to optimize the image encoder is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ inter and λ tsc are the weight hyperparameters for L inter and L tsc , respectively. The overall algorithmic procedure is provided in Supplementary Material Section S.III.

## 4 Experiment

## 4.1 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate our method on the SYSU-MM01 [31], RegDB [23] and LLCM [52] datasets. SYSUMM01 consists of images from 491 identities captured by four visible cameras and two near-infrared cameras. Following existing methods [3, 37], a total of 22,258 visible images and 11,909 infrared images from 395 identities are used for training. The query set and gallery consist of infrared and visible images, respectively, from the remaining 96 identities. RegDB contains 412 identities, with each identity having 10 visible images and 10 thermal infrared images. Following existing protocols [3, 37], we use images from 206 identities for training and the remaining 206 identities for testing. LLCM is collected under complex low-light conditions, making it a more challenging dataset compared to the previous two. It contains 46,767 bounding boxes of 1,064 identities captured by 9 cameras.

Following existing methods [32, 37], we use cumulative matching characteristics (CMC), mean average precision (mAP), and mean inverse negative penalty (mINP) to evaluate performance.

## 4.2 Implementation Details

The image encoder of LVLM-AAM is based on a pretrained ResNet-50 [13] and consists of two branches to separately handle inputs from the visible and infrared modalities. For the learnable text embeddings, we set M = 4 . All images are resized to 288×144, and random flipping, random grayscale conversion [19], channel augmentation [47], and random erasing [55] are applied as data augmentation. We set the batch size B to 128. In each iteration, we randomly select 8 clusters from each modality, and sample 16 images from each cluster. We use DBSCAN [6] to perform intra-modality clustering, where the distance threshold and the minimum number of samples are set to 0.6 and 4, respectively, on SYSU-MM01 [31], and to 0.3 and 4 on RegDB [23]. We adopt the Adam optimizer [16] for model training. Homogeneous learning (i.e., Eq. 3) is performed for 50 epochs, followed by an update of the learnable text embeddings (i.e., Eq. 6) over another 50 epochs. Finally, heterogeneous learning (i.e., Eq. 11) is conducted for an additional 50 epochs. The initial learning rate is set to 0.00035, and it decays 10 times every 20 epochs. The temperature hyperparameter τ is set to 0.05. For attribute-aware refinement (AR), we set η = 2 . For attribute-aware contrastive learning (AAC), we set α = 0 . 5 . Regarding the weight hyperparameters for L inter and L tsc , we set λ inter = 0 . 5 and λ tsc = 0 . 5 . An analysis of the sensitivity of LVLM-AAM to the hyperparameters η and λ tsc can be found in the Supplementary Material Section S.IV. The experiments are conducted on four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. The LVLM inference is only required once during the training phase to extract identity attributes and is not needed during the testing phase. Therefore, the computational cost associated with LVLM inference does not affect the inference speed of the trained ReID model during testing.

## 4.3 Comparison with the State-of-the-art Methods

As shown in Table 1, we compare the proposed LVLM-AAM with existing methods on SYSUMM01 (both All Search and Indoor Search) and RegDB (Visible to Thermal). Among existing UVI-ReID methods, SDCL [37] and DLM [48] have achieved strong performance on SYSU-MM01 and RegDB, respectively. Our proposed LVLM-AAM surpasses both SDCL [37] and DLM [48] in overall performance across both datasets. Specifically, on SYSU-MM01 (All Search), LVLM-AAM outperforms SDCL [37] by 2.09%, 0.26%, and 1.23% in terms of Rank-1 accuracy, mAP, and mINP, respectively. On RegDB (Visible to Thermal), LVLM-AAM achieves improvements of 2.70%, 1.13%, and 2.05% over DLM [48] on the same three metrics. This is mainly because LVLM-AAM not only effectively leverages attribute arrays provided by the LVLM to obtain reliable pseudo-labels, but also jointly utilizes explicit and implicit attributes to further promote modality-invariant feature learning. SVI-ReID methods rely on manually annotated identity labels, which are inaccessible to LVLM-AAM and require significantly higher human effort compared to the attribute arrays used by LVLM-AAM. Encouragingly, LVLM-AAM achieves superior overall performance on both datasets compared to early SVI-ReID methods (e.g., DDAG [44], AGW [45], and MCLNet [12]), and demonstrates competitive results against more recent methods (e.g., FMCNet [51] and DART [39]). Moreover, on the RegDB dataset, the Rank-1 accuracy of LVLM-AAM is already comparable to that of the latest SVI-ReID methods (e.g., SAAI [7] and STAR-ReID [26]). These results further validate the

Table 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on the SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets. The best performances among UVI-ReID methods are highlighted in bold, while performances of SVIReID methods that are lower than those of LVLM-AAM are indicated in italics.

|          | SYSU-MM01      | SYSU-MM01   | SYSU-MM01   | SYSU-MM01     | SYSU-MM01     | SYSU-MM01     | SYSU-MM01     | RegDB              | RegDB              | RegDB              |
|----------|----------------|-------------|-------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|          | Methods        | Methods     | Methods     | Indoor Search | Indoor Search | Indoor Search | Indoor Search | Visible to Thermal | Visible to Thermal | Visible to Thermal |
|          |                | Rank-1      | mAP         | mINP          | Rank-1        | mAP           | mINP          | Rank-1             | mAP                | mINP               |
| UVI-ReID | H2H [21]       | 30.15       | 29.40       | -             | -             | -             | -             | 23.81              | 18.87              | -                  |
|          | ADCA [38]      | 45.51       | 42.73       | 28.29         | 50.60         | 59.11         | 55.17         | 67.20              | 64.05              | 52.67              |
|          | CHCR [24]      | 47.72       | 45.34       | -             | -             | -             | -             | 69.31              | 64.74              | -                  |
|          | CCLNet [3]     | 54.03       | 50.19       | -             | 56.68         | 65.12         | -             | 69.94              | 65.53              | -                  |
|          | PGM [32]       | 57.27       | 51.78       | 34.96         | 56.23         | 62.74         | 58.13         | 69.48              | 65.41              | -                  |
|          | GUR [36]       | 63.51       | 61.63       | 47.93         | 71.11         | 76.23         | 72.57         | 73.91              | 70.23              | 58.88              |
|          | SDCL [37]      | 64.49       | 63.24       | 51.06         | 71.37         | 76.90         | 73.50         | 86.91              | 78.92              | 62.83              |
|          | PCLHD [30]     | 64.4        | 58.7        | -             | 69.5          | 74.4          | -             | 84.3               | 80.7               | -                  |
|          | PCAL [40]      | 57.94       | 52.85       | 36.90         | 60.07         | 66.73         | 62.09         | 86.43              | 82.51              | 72.33              |
|          | DLM [48]       | 62.15       | 58.42       | 43.70         | 67.31         | 72.86         | 68.89         | 87.55              | 82.83              | 71.93              |
|          | DDAG [44]      | 54.75       | 53.02       | 39.62         | 61.02         | 67.98         | 62.61         | 69.34              | 63.46              | 49.24              |
|          | AGW[45]        | 47.50       | 47.65       | 35.30         | 54.17         | 62.97         | 59.23         | 70.05              | 66.37              | 50.19              |
|          | MCLNet [12]    | 65.40       | 61.98       | 47.39         | 72.56         | 76.58         | 72.10         | 80.31              | 73.07              | 57.39              |
|          | FMCNet [51]    | 66.34       | 62.51       | -             | 68.15         | 74.09         | -             | 89.12              | 84.43              | -                  |
| SVI-ReID | DART [39]      | 68.72       | 66.29       | 53.26         | 72.52         | 78.17         | 74.94         | 83.60              | 75.67              | 60.60              |
|          | SGIEL [8]      | 77.12       | 72.33       | -             | 82.07         | 82.95         | -             | 92.18              | 86.59              | -                  |
|          | MUN[49]        | 76.24       | 73.81       | -             | 79.42         | 82.06         | -             | 95.19              | 87.15              | -                  |
|          | SAAI [7]       | 75.90       | 77.03       | -             | 83.20         | 88.01         | -             | 91.07              | 91.45              | -                  |
|          | IDKL [28]      | 81.42       | 79.85       | -             | 87.14         | 89.37         | -             | 94.72              | 90.19              | -                  |
|          | STAR-ReID [26] | 82.93       | 80.47       | -             | 88.04         | 89.58         | -             | 91.89              | 93.31              | -                  |
|          | LVLM-AAM       | 66.58       | 63.50       | 52.29         | 72.97         | 78.65         | 75.21         | 90.25              | 83.96              | 73.98              |

Table 2: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on the LLCM dataset.

| Methods      | Reference   | Visible to Infrared   | Visible to Infrared   | Infrared to Visible   | Infrared to Visible   |
|--------------|-------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
|              |             | Rank-1                | mAP                   | Rank-1                | mAP                   |
| CCLNet [3]   | MM'23       | 45.3                  | 49.9                  | 39.3                  | 45.3                  |
| PGM [32]     | CVPR'23     | 44.4                  | 48.6                  | 38.4                  | 44.2                  |
| SDCL [37]    | CVPR'24     | 46.9                  | 52.4                  | 43.4                  | 48.2                  |
| SCA-RCP [20] | TKDE'24     | 29.1                  | 33.3                  | 22.3                  | 28.0                  |
| LVLM-AAM     | Ours        | 52.2                  | 57.3                  | 46.0                  | 51.7                  |

effectiveness of LVLM-AAM and highlight the potential of replacing costly manual annotations with automatically extracted attribute arrays.

We further compare LVLM-AAM with state-of-the-art unsupervised methods on the LLCM dataset. As shown in Table 2, our method outperforms existing methods in both testing scenarios of LLCM. For instance, compared to SDCL [37], LVLM-AAM achieves a more significant performance gain on LLCM than on SYSU-MM01. Moreover, despite SCA-RCP [20] utilizing camera labels, LVLMAAMstill demonstrates a substantial advantage. This is because LLCM presents greater complexity compared to SYSU-MM01 and RegDB, making it more challenging for existing methods to obtain reliable pseudo-labels. In contrast, LVLM-AAM effectively leverages attribute arrays from the LVLM to enhance the reliability of pseudo-labels and utilizes text semantics to facilitate model optimization, thereby achieving superior performance over existing methods. These experimental results not only validate the superiority of the proposed LVLM-AAM but also demonstrate its strong generalization capability.

## 4.4 Ablation Study

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of attribute-aware refinement (AR), attribute-aware matching (AM), explicit-implicit attribute fusion (EAF), and attribute-aware contrastive learning (AAC). As shown in Table 3, the baseline adopts the same image encoder and CLIP-based architecture as LVLM-AAM. The key difference lies in that the baseline does not incorporate AR, AM, or EAF, and replaces AAC with the image-to-text contrastive loss (ITC) [3], which utilizes text features containing only implicit attributes to assist the optimization of the image encoder. Four ablation

Table 3: Ablation study on the SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets.

| Methods   | AR           | AM           | EAF          | ITC          | AAC          | SYSU-MM01(All Search)   | SYSU-MM01(All Search)   | SYSU-MM01(All Search)   | RegDB(Visible to Thermal)   | RegDB(Visible to Thermal)   | RegDB(Visible to Thermal)   |
|-----------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Methods   | AR           | AM           | EAF          | ITC          | AAC          | Rank-1                  | mAP                     | mINP                    | Rank-1                      | mAP                         | mINP                        |
| Baseline  |              |              |              | glyph[check] |              | 58.52                   | 52.89                   | 35.27                   | 72.55                       | 68.59                       | 56.90                       |
| A1        | glyph[check] |              |              | glyph[check] |              | 60.85                   | 56.03                   | 41.26                   | 75.63                       | 71.28                       | 60.05                       |
| A2        | glyph[check] | glyph[check] |              | glyph[check] |              | 61.36                   | 57.40                   | 43.18                   | 78.34                       | 73.57                       | 62.17                       |
| A3        | glyph[check] | glyph[check] | glyph[check] | glyph[check] |              | 62.51                   | 59.26                   | 46.11                   | 80.29                       | 75.16                       | 65.23                       |
| A4        | glyph[check] | glyph[check] |              |              | glyph[check] | 64.59                   | 61.89                   | 50.69                   | 86.57                       | 79.85                       | 70.29                       |
| A5        | glyph[check] | glyph[check] | glyph[check] |              | glyph[check] | 66.58                   | 63.50                   | 52.29                   | 90.25                       | 83.96                       | 73.98                       |

Figure 3: Statistical results of F-score and NIPP.

<!-- image -->

variants (A1, A2, A3, and A4), along with the complete LVLM-AAM (A5), progressively introduce AR, AM, EAF, and AAC based on the baseline.

Effectiveness of AR and AM. As shown in Table 3, introducing AR in A1 leads to noticeable performance improvements over the baseline on both SYSU-MM01 and RegDB. For example, on SYSU-MM01 (All Search), Rank-1, mAP, and mINP are improved by 2.33%, 3.14%, and 5.99%, respectively, while on RegDB (Visible to Thermal), the three metrics are increased by 3.08%, 2.69%, and 3.15%, respectively. To further evaluate the effectiveness of AR, we assess the F-score [11] of the intra-modality pseudo-labels. A higher F-score [11] indicates greater accuracy of the pseudo-labels. As shown in Figure 3a and Figure 3b, A1 achieves a significantly higher F-score compared to the baseline, verifying that AR can effectively leverage attribute arrays to enhance the reliability of pseudo-labels and thereby improve model performance. Building upon A1, A2 introduces AM and achieves further performance improvements. For example, on SYSU-MM01 (All Search), Rank-1, mAP, and mINP increase by 0.51%, 1.37%, and 1.92%, respectively. On RegDB (Visible to Thermal), the three metrics improve by 2.71%, 2.29%, and 2.12%, respectively. In addition, we analyze the number of inter-modality positive pairs (NIPP) obtained by A1 and A2. Specifically, two images are considered an inter-modality positive pair if they share the same inter-modality pseudo-label, the same ground-truth identity label, and different modality labels. Generally, a higher NIPP indicates more accurate inter-modality matching. As shown in Figure 3c and Figure 3d, A2 increases NIPP compared to A1. This confirms that AM can enhance model performance by improving the accuracy of inter-modality matching.

Effectiveness of EAF and AAC. EAF introduces explicit attributes to enrich the text semantics. As shown in Table 3, A3 incorporates EAF based on A2 and achieves further performance improvements on both SYSU-MM01 and RegDB. In the VI-ReID task, due to the modality gap, the feature distance between inter-modality positive pairs is typically much larger than that between intra-modality positive pairs. As shown in Figure 4, compared to A2, A3 slightly reduces the feature distance between inter-modality positive pairs. This improvement can be attributed to EAF introducing explicit, modality-invariant, and identity-relevant attributes to enrich the text semantics, thereby effectively enhancing modality-invariant feature learning. A4 builds upon A2 by introducing AAC, which involves computing dynamic text features and replacing the image-to-text contrastive loss (ITC) [3] with the text semantic contrastive loss (Eq. 10). As shown in Table 3, A4 achieves significant performance improvements over A2 after introducing AAC. For example, on SYSU-MM01 (All Search), Rank-1, mAP, and mINP improve by 3.23%, 4.49%, and 7.51%, respectively. As illustrated in Figure 4, A4 significantly reduces the feature distance between inter-modality positive pairs compared to A2. This is because AAC incorporates inter-modality matching information into the

Figure 4: The feature distance distributions of intra-modality and inter-modality positive pairs for A2, A3, A4, and LVLM-AAM.

<!-- image -->

dynamic text features and encourages image features to approach the dynamic text features during optimization, thereby enhancing modality-invariant feature learning.

Furthermore, we observe that LVLM-AAM (A5) outperforms all of the aforementioned ablation variants and further reduces the feature distance between inter-modality positive pairs compared to A3 and A4. This validates that AR, AM, EAF, and AAC can be organically integrated to enhance the model's performance in cross-modality scenarios.

## 5 Conclusion and Limitations

In this paper, we propose an LVLM-driven attribute-aware modeling (LVLM-AAM) method to improve VI-ReID. Ablation studies validate the effectiveness of each module in LVLM-AAM. Specifically, attribute-aware reliable labeling, which comprises attribute-aware refinement and attributeaware matching, effectively leverages attribute arrays to enhance the reliability of both intra-modality and inter-modality pseudo-labels. Explicit-implicit attribute fusion utilizes attribute arrays to acquire fine-grained identity-related text features, while attribute-aware contrastive learning promotes modality-invariant learning by integrating static and dynamic text features. Comparative experimental results demonstrate the superiority of LVLM-AAM, which not only significantly outperforms existing unsupervised methods and earlier supervised approaches but also competes with state-of-the-art supervised methods in certain scenarios.

Essentially, this paper represents an early exploration of applying the LVLM to UVI-ReID, with the core contribution being the preliminary validation of the effectiveness of attribute arrays extracted by the LVLM in UVI-ReID. However, a thorough analysis of a broader range of attribute arrays has not been conducted, which could serve as a potential direction for future research. Additionally, the eight groupings manually set in attribute-aware matching are a very preliminary exploration, and exploring more diverse or flexible strategies in the future could yield even more promising results.

## Acknowledgements

This work is supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant no. 2023YFC3305003, 2023YFC3305000)

## References

- [1] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025.
- [2] Hao Chen, Benoit Lagadec, and Francois Bremond. Ice: Inter-instance contrastive encoding for unsupervised person re-identification. In ICCV , pages 14960-14969, 2021.
- [3] Zhong Chen, Zhizhong Zhang, Xin Tan, Yanyun Qu, and Yuan Xie. Unveiling the power of clip in unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. In ACM MM , pages 3667-3675, 2023.
- [4] Zuozhuo Dai, Guangyuan Wang, Weihao Yuan, Siyu Zhu, and Ping Tan. Cluster contrast for unsupervised person re-identification. In ACCV , pages 1142-1160, 2022.

- [5] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In ICLR , 2021.
- [6] Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In KDD , volume 96, pages 226-231, 1996.
- [7] Xingye Fang, Yang Yang, and Ying Fu. Visible-infrared person re-identification via semantic alignment and affinity inference. In ICCV , pages 11270-11279, 2023.
- [8] Jiawei Feng, Ancong Wu, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Shape-erased feature learning for visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 22752-22761, 2023.
- [9] Zhanxiang Feng, Jianhuang Lai, and Xiaohua Xie. Learning modality-specific representations for visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TIP , 29:579-590, 2019.
- [10] Yunpeng Gong, Zhun Zhong, Yansong Qu, Zhiming Luo, Rongrong Ji, and Min Jiang. Crossmodality perturbation synergy attack for person re-identification. In NeurIPS , 2024.
- [11] Cyril Goutte and Eric Gaussier. A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall and f-score, with implication for evaluation. In ECIR , pages 345-359. Springer, 2005.
- [12] Xin Hao, Sanyuan Zhao, Mang Ye, and Jianbing Shen. Cross-modality person re-identification via modality confusion and center aggregation. In ICCV , pages 16403-16412, 2021.
- [13] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR , pages 770-778, 2016.
- [14] Shuting He, Hao Luo, Pichao Wang, Fan Wang, Hao Li, and Wei Jiang. TransReID: Transformerbased object re-identification. In ICCV , pages 15013-15022, 2021.
- [15] Zhangyi Hu, Bin Yang, and Mang Ye. Empowering visible-infrared person re-identification with large foundation models. NeurIPS , 37:117363-117387, 2024.
- [16] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR , 2015.
- [17] Leijun Li, Qinghua Hu, Xiangqian Wu, and Daren Yu. Exploration of classification confidence in ensemble learning. PR , 47(9):3120-3131, 2014.
- [18] Siyuan Li, Li Sun, and Qingli Li. CLIP-ReID: exploiting vision-language model for image re-identification without concrete text labels. In AAAI , volume 37, pages 1405-1413, 2023.
- [19] Wenkang Li, Ke Qi, Wenbin Chen, and Yicong Zhou. Unified batch all triplet loss for visibleinfrared person re-identification. In IJCNN , pages 1-8. IEEE, 2021.
- [20] Zhiyong Li, Haojie Liu, Xiantao Peng, and Wei Jiang. Inter-intra modality knowledge learning and clustering noise alleviation for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TKDE , 36(8):3934-3947, 2024.
- [21] Wenqi Liang, Guangcong Wang, Jianhuang Lai, and Xiaohua Xie. Homogeneous-toheterogeneous: Unsupervised learning for rgb-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TIP , 30:6392-6407, 2021.
- [22] Yan Lu, Yue Wu, Bin Liu, Tianzhu Zhang, Baopu Li, Qi Chu, and Nenghai Yu. Cross-modality person re-identification with shared-specific feature transfer. In CVPR , pages 13379-13389, 2020.
- [23] Dat Tien Nguyen, Hyung Gil Hong, Ki Wan Kim, and Kang Ryoung Park. Person recognition system based on a combination of body images from visible light and thermal cameras. Sensors , 17(3):605, 2017.

- [24] Zhiqi Pang, Chunyu Wang, Lingling Zhao, Yang Liu, and Gaurav Sharma. Cross-modality hierarchical clustering and refinement for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TCSVT , 2023.
- [25] Zhiqi Pang, Lingling Zhao, Yang Liu, Chunyu Wang, and Gaurav Sharma. Robust labeling and invariance modeling for unsupervised cross-resolution person re-identification. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 2025.
- [26] Yuxuan Qiu, Liyang Wang, Wei Song, Jiawei Liu, Zhiping Shi, and Na Jiang. Advancing visible-infrared person re-identification: Synergizing visual-textual reasoning and cross-modal feature alignment. IEEE TIFS , 2025.
- [27] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML , pages 8748-8763, 2021.
- [28] Kaijie Ren and Lei Zhang. Implicit discriminative knowledge learning for visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 393-402, 2024.
- [29] Jiangming Shi, Xiangbo Yin, Yeyun Chen, Yachao Zhang, Zhizhong Zhang, Yuan Xie, and Yanyun Qu. Multi-memory matching for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. In ECCV , pages 456-474. Springer, 2024.
- [30] Jiangming Shi, Xiangbo Yin, Yachao Zhang, Yuan Xie, Yanyun Qu, et al. Learning commonality, divergence and variety for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. NeurIPS , 37:99715-99734, 2024.
- [31] Ancong Wu, Wei-Shi Zheng, Hong-Xing Yu, Shaogang Gong, and Jianhuang Lai. RGB-infrared cross-modality person re-identification. In ICCV , pages 5380-5389, 2017.
- [32] Zesen Wu and Mang Ye. Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification via progressive graph matching and alternate learning. In CVPR , pages 9548-9558, 2023.
- [33] Run-Sen Xia, Xue-Yan Wang, Si-Bao Chen, Jin Tang, and Bin Luo. Camera-proxy enhanced identity-recalibration learning for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TCSVT , 2025.
- [34] Kunlun Xu, Chenghao Jiang, Peixi Xiong, Yuxin Peng, and Jiahuan Zhou. Dask: Distribution rehearsing via adaptive style kernel learning for exemplar-free lifelong person re-identification. In AAAI , volume 39, pages 8915-8923, 2025.
- [35] Kunlun Xu, Zichen Liu, Xu Zou, Yuxin Peng, and Jiahuan Zhou. Long short-term knowledge decomposition and consolidation for lifelong person re-identification. TPAMI , 2025.
- [36] Bin Yang, Jun Chen, and Mang Ye. Towards grand unified representation learning for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. In ICCV , pages 11069-11079, 2023.
- [37] Bin Yang, Jun Chen, and Mang Ye. Shallow-deep collaborative learning for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 16870-16879, 2024.
- [38] Bin Yang, Mang Ye, Jun Chen, and Zesen Wu. Augmented dual-contrastive aggregation learning for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. In ACM MM , pages 2843-2851, 2022.
- [39] Mouxing Yang, Zhenyu Huang, Peng Hu, Taihao Li, Jiancheng Lv, and Xi Peng. Learning with twin noisy labels for visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 14308-14317, 2022.
- [40] Yiming Yang, Weipeng Hu, and Haifeng Hu. Progressive cross-modal association learning for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TIFS , 2025.
- [41] Yongquan Yang, Haijun Lv, and Ning Chen. A survey on ensemble learning under the era of deep learning. Artificial Intelligence Review , 56(6):5545-5589, 2023.
- [42] Mang Ye, Xiangyuan Lan, and Qingming Leng. Modality-aware collaborative learning for visible thermal person re-identification. In ACM MM , pages 347-355, 2019.

- [43] Mang Ye, Weijian Ruan, Bo Du, and Mike Zheng Shou. Channel augmented joint learning for visible-infrared recognition. In ICCV , pages 13567-13576, 2021.
- [44] Mang Ye, Jianbing Shen, David J. Crandall, Ling Shao, and Jiebo Luo. Dynamic dual-attentive aggregation learning for visible-infrared person re-identification. In ECCV , pages 229-247. Springer, 2020.
- [45] Mang Ye, Jianbing Shen, Gaojie Lin, Tao Xiang, Ling Shao, and Steven CH Hoi. Deep learning for person re-identification: A survey and outlook. IEEE TPAMI , 44(6):2872-2893, 2021.
- [46] Mang Ye, Zheng Wang, Xiangyuan Lan, and Pong C Yuen. Visible thermal person reidentification via dual-constrained top-ranking. In IJCAI , volume 1, page 2, 2018.
- [47] Mang Ye, Zesen Wu, Cuiqun Chen, and Bo Du. Channel augmentation for visible-infrared re-identification. IEEE TPAMI , 2023.
- [48] Mang Ye, Zesen Wu, and Bo Du. Dual-level matching with outlier filtering for unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TPAMI , 2025.
- [49] Hao Yu, Xu Cheng, Wei Peng, Weihao Liu, and Guoying Zhao. Modality unifying network for visible-infrared person re-identification. In ICCV , pages 11185-11195, 2023.
- [50] Xiaoyan Yu, Neng Dong, Liehuang Zhu, Hao Peng, and Dapeng Tao. Clip-driven semantic discovery network for visible-infrared person re-identification. IEEE TMM , 2025.
- [51] Qiang Zhang, Changzhou Lai, Jianan Liu, Nianchang Huang, and Jungong Han. FMCNet: Feature-level modality compensation for visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 7349-7358, 2022.
- [52] Yukang Zhang and Hanzi Wang. Diverse embedding expansion network and low-light crossmodality benchmark for visible-infrared person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 2153-2162, 2023.
- [53] Yukang Zhang, Yan Yan, Jie Li, and Hanzi Wang. MRCN: A novel modality restitution and compensation network for visible-infrared person re-identification. In AAAI , volume 37, pages 3498-3506, 2023.
- [54] Liang Zheng, Liyue Shen, Lu Tian, Shengjin Wang, Jingdong Wang, and Qi Tian. Scalable person re-identification: A benchmark. In ICCV , pages 1116-1124, 2015.
- [55] Zhun Zhong, Liang Zheng, Guoliang Kang, Shaozi Li, and Yi Yang. Random erasing data augmentation. In AAAI , volume 34, pages 13001-13008, 2020.
- [56] Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-language models. IJCV , 130(9):2337-2348, 2022.
- [57] Haidong Zhu, Pranav Budhwant, Zhaoheng Zheng, and Ram Nevatia. Seas: Shape-aligned supervision for person re-identification. In CVPR , pages 164-174, 2024.

## NeurIPS Paper Checklist

## 1. Claims

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper's contributions and scope?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: The abstract provides a concise summary of the paper's scope and contributions. The introduction first presents a detailed overview of the problem background and the scope of the paper, and then elaborates on the proposed method and the specific contributions made by this paper.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper.
- The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
- The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
- It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper.

## 2. Limitations

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: The final paragraph of the 'Conclusion and Limitations' section discusses the current limitations of this work.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
- The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
- The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
- The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
- The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
- The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size.
- If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness.
- While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren't acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

## 3. Theory assumptions and proofs

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: The full set of theoretical assumptions and corresponding formulations are provided in Section 3. Furthermore, Section 4 presents a detailed analysis validating the correctness and effectiveness of these theoretical results.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
- All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and crossreferenced.
- All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
- The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition.
- Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
- Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

## 4. Experimental result reproducibility

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: To enhance the reproducibility of our experimental results, we provide a detailed description of our method in Section 3. Additionally, key experimental details are presented in the 'Implementation Details' subsection to facilitate replication, and the algorithmic procedure is outlined in Supplementary Material Section S.III.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not.
- If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
- Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
- While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example
- (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.
- (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully.
- (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).

- (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

## 5. Open access to data and code

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?

Answer: [No]

Justification: Given that our method represents a novel and preliminary attempt, we are considering releasing a more polished and comprehensive version of the code in the future. In the meantime, we have provided key experimental details in the 'Implementation Details' subsection and included an algorithmic procedure in Section S.III of the Supplementary Material to enable researchers to partially or fully reproduce our method.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
- Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so 'No' is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).
- The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
- The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
- At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable).
- Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

## 6. Experimental setting/details

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We provide all relevant training and testing details in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
- The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

## 7. Experiment statistical significance

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

Answer: [No]

Justification: We do not report error bars in our results. However, following established practice in prior work, we conduct each experiment 10 times with different random selections or splits on the SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets, and report the average performance over these runs to ensure the stability and reliability of the results.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.
- The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).
- The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
- The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
- It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.
- It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.
- For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).
- If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

## 8. Experiments compute resources

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We provide sufficient information in Section 4.2.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
- The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
- The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn't make it into the paper).

## 9. Code of ethics

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: The research fully conforms in every respect to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
- If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics.
- The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

## 10. Broader impacts

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: A discussion of broader impacts is provided in Supplementary Material Section S.V.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
- If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
- Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
- The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.
- The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
- If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

## 11. Safeguards

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: The pretrained models and large vision-language models used in this paper are publicly available and widely adopted in the research community. We do not release any additional pretrained models, and no new models or datasets with potential misuse risks are introduced.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
- Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
- Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
- We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.

## 12. Licenses for existing assets

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: All datasets and models used in this paper have been properly credited, with appropriate citations provided. Their licenses and terms of use have been explicitly acknowledged and fully respected.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
- The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
- The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
- The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
- For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided.
- If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
- For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
- If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset's creators.

## 13. New assets

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: This paper does not introduce any new assets.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
- Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc.
- The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used.
- At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

## 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: This paper does not involve crowdsourcing experiments or research with human subjects.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper.
- According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.

## 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: This paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper.
- We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution.
- For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

## 16. Declaration of LLM usage

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We employ a large vision-language model (LVLM) as a key component to enhance existing methods. The details of its usage are described in Section 3.1 and further elaborated in the Supplementary Material Section S.I.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
- Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described.