## Blackbox Model Provenance via Palimpsestic Membership Inference

Rohith Kuditipudi ∗ rohithk@stanford.edu

Diyi Yang † diyiy@cs.stanford.edu

Jing Huang ∗ hij@stanford.edu

Christopher Potts † cgpotts@stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science Stanford University

## Abstract

Suppose Alice trains an open-weight language model and Bob uses a blackbox derivative of Alice's model to produce text. Can Alice prove that Bob is using her model, either by querying Bob's derivative model (query setting) or from the text alone (observational setting)? We formulate this question as an independence testing problem-in which the null hypothesis is that Bob's model or text is independent of Alice's randomized training run-and investigate it through the lens of palimpsestic memorization in language models: models are more likely to memorize data seen later in training, so we can test whether Bob is using Alice's model using test statistics that capture correlation between Bob's model or text and the ordering of training examples in Alice's training run. If Alice has randomly shuffled her training data, then any significant correlation amounts to exactly quantifiable statistical evidence against the null hypothesis, regardless of the composition of Alice's training data. In the query setting, we directly estimate (via prompting) the likelihood Bob's model gives to Alice's training examples and their training order; we correlate the likelihoods of over 40 fine-tunes of various Pythia and OLMo base models ranging from 1B to 12B parameters with the base model's training data order, achieving a p-value on the order of at most 1 × 10 -8 in all but six cases. In the observational setting, we try two approaches based on estimating 1) the likelihood of Bob's text overlapping with spans of Alice's training examples and 2) the likelihood of Bob's text with respect to different versions of Alice's model we obtain by repeating the last phase (e.g., 1 %) of her training run on reshuffled data. The second approach can reliably distinguish Bob's text from as little as a few hundred tokens; the first does not involve any retraining but requires many more tokens (several hundred thousand) to achieve high power.

## 1 Introduction

Definition 1. A palimpsest is a 'writing material (such as a parchment or tablet) used one or more times after earlier writing has been erased' [1].

∗ Equal contribution.

† Equal advising.

Sally Zhu ∗ salzhu@stanford.edu

Percy Liang † psl@stanford.edu

Figure 1: We regress the negative log-likelihoods of pythia-6.9b-deduped and pythia-6.9b on pythia-6.9b-deduped training examples against its training order, which is independent of pythia-6.9b training order. Though the log-likelihoods of individual examples are noisy, the overall trend is clear over many examples: pythia-6.9b-deduped exhibits significant correlation, while the independently trained pythia-6.9b exhibits near zero correlation.

<!-- image -->

Suppose Alice trains an open-weight language model and Bob produces text using a derivative of Alice's model. Can Alice prove that Bob is using her model? We ground this question with a few motivating examples. Alice may be a model developer who suspects Bob of hosting a chat interface that violates Alice's terms of service. 3 Can Alice prove via querying Bob's interface that it is built (e.g., fine-tuned) from her model? Alternatively, Alice may suspect Bob of operating a social media bot using her model. Can she prove from the account's post history that it is using her model?

We formulate the question as an independence testing problem: the goal is to test whether Bob's text (or equivalently, the model producing it) is statistically independent of Alice's training run. The inherently randomized nature of language model training-due in part to the shuffling of training examples-allows us to treat the training outcome as a random variable. We assume access to the ordered sequence of training examples from Alice's training run and consider two variations of the problem depending on the type of access permitted to Bob's model. In the query setting , we are able to directly prompt Bob's model; in the observational setting , we merely observe text generated by Bob's model from an unknown prompt (or multiple prompts). We aim to design tests that are

1. effective -the test should have high power;
2. transparent -it should not rely on keeping model training or implementation details private;
3. noninvasive -it should not require Alice to modify her original training data or model.

In the query setting, prior work fails to achieve these three desiderata, compromising either transparency or noninvasiveness in order to retain effectiveness. For example, inserting canaries into Alice's model (e.g., by having it memorize a random binary string) [3] enables effective testing (based on whether Bob's model has memorized the canary) but requires modifying Alice's model. Using a small held-out test set [4] (and testing if Bob performs worse on the test data than Alice's training data) is only effective if the test set is private (since otherwise Bob can evade detection by training on the test set). In the observational setting, we are not aware of any effective tests (let alone those achieving all three desiderata). We defer a more thorough discussion of related work to Section 2.

The main insight underpinning the design of our tests is that language models tend to memorize their training data, and these memorization effects are stronger for more recent training examples. In this sense, language models exhibit palimpsestic memorization : all training examples influence the final trained model, but later examples diminish the effects of previous examples. Thus, we can test whether Bob's model or text derives from Alice's by designing test statistics that correlate its behavior with the ordering of examples in Alice's training run (Figure 1). In the query setting, we can directly evaluate the likelihood Bob's model gives to Alice's training examples (by evaluating his model on these examples to obtain token probabilities) and measure the correlation between example

3 For example, Meta's terms of service require those using their models within a product to acknowledge that the product is 'Built with Meta Llama 3' [2].

likelihood and training order. In the observational setting, we use various notions of n-gram overlap between a training example and Bob's text as proxies for its likelihood under Bob's model; we also try retraining copies of Alice's model on reshuffled data (from an intermediate checkpoint) to determine whether Bob's text has higher likelihood under Alice's original model versus the retrained copies. In both settings, if Alice has randomly shuffled her training data-as is common practice 4 -and Bob's model is independent of Alice's training run, then there is guaranteed to be no (statistically significant) correlation between likelihood (i.e., either the likelihood of Alice's training examples under Bob's model or the likelihood of Bob's text under Alice's model versus the retrained copies) and training order. Thus, our tests yield provable control over false positive errors.

We formalize our problem formulation and the implementation of our tests in Section 3. We empirically validate our tests in Section 4 using the Pythia (trained on pythia and pythia-deduped , the deduped and non-deduped Pile datasets used to train Pythia models) and OLMo (trained on OLMo , OLMo-1.7 , and OLMo-2 , the Dolma and OLMo-Mix datasets) model families, as well as small-scale models we train on TinyStories [5, 6, 7]. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of key takeaways and directions for future work in Section 5. We release code and data for reproducing experiments. 5

## 2 Related Work

Our work develops methods for establishing the provenance of two types of artifacts that may derive from a language model: the model itself (in the query setting) and text (in the observational setting). We presently focus on the work most relevant to ours; see Oliynyk et al. [8], Wu et al. [9], Jawahar et al. [10], and Suvra et al. [11] for a more comprehensive surveys on model and text provenance. We also discuss prior work studying properties of memorization in language models.

Model provenance. Maini et al. [4] propose a method they term dataset inference that enables testing whether Bob's model is independent of Alice by measuring the difference in performance of Bob's model on Alice's training set versus a small i.i.d. held-out test set. Crucially, their method is only effective if the test set is kept private, thus precluding transparency. Though in principle it may be possible to achieve transparency by scaling up the size of the test set (e.g., to be commensurate with Alice's training set), doing so would necessarily be more invasive: it would not only require Alice to plan in advance for this specific scenario when launching her training run but moreover would also limit the amount of available training data. Finally, their method does not apply to the observational setting since it requires querying Bob's model on the held-out test set.

A line of work under the umbrella of model fingerprinting has developed a multitude of ways to perturb a language model in some subtle way (e.g., by planting a backdoor trigger [12, 13] or by embedding a pattern into the model's output [14, 15, 16]) so as to enable downstream identification of derivative models. Due to the perturbation step, these methods all fail to satisfy our noninvasive criterion. Model fingerprinting is also inapplicable to the observational setting since it requires querying Bob's model on the fingerprint trigger.

Another line of work on model provenance develops heuristic techniques for predicting whether two models are independent or not based on the similarity of their outputs [17, 18]; however, these methods are not always reliable and thus fail to satisfy our effectivity criterion. In particular, we show in Appendix C that independently trained models trained on similar data can behave more similarly to each other than actual derivative models. Finally, we remark that recent work developing independence tests for language models based on their weights is inapplicable to our setting [19, 20], since we do not assume access to the weights of Bob's model.

Text provenance. The problem of detecting whether a text derives from a language model has drawn considerable attention in the literature. While there exist a number of heuristic techniques for predicting whether text derives from a language model [21, 22], these heuristic techniques are inexact and often unreliable [10]; furthermore, often the focus is on determining whether a text derives from any language model (i.e., versus a human) rather than attributing text to a particular

4 Language models are typically trained on randomly shuffled data; in particular, training consists of a sequence of gradient steps taken on batches of data sampled randomly from some large pool. While it is common to have distinct phases of training (e.g., pretraining, mid-training, and post-training), so long as data is still shuffled within a particular phase (e.g, pretraining) our tests will still be applicable (by considering the ordering specifically for that phase).

5 https://github.com/RohithKuditipudi/blackbox-model-tracing .

language model. In contrast to these heuristic methods, our techniques provide provable control over false positives via exact p-values and enable attribution of text to (derivatives of) a particular language model. Finally, we remark that inference-time watermarks [23, 24, 25, 26]-i.e., techniques for detecting text downstream by applying watermarks to generated text-are inapplicable to our setting since we allow Bob (an untrusted party) to directly sample text himself. Other work has also shown that fine-tuning often destroys watermarks from the base model [27].

Characterizing memorization in language models. Our work crucially leverages properties of memorization in language models inspired by previous work, in particular that language models tend to memorize sequences seen in training and assign high likelihood to these sequences [28, 29]. However, with large-scale pre-training, models also forget examples seen earlier in training [30, 31]. Recent work studies the combined effects of memorization and forgetting by tracking which sequences occurred at a given step across training [31, 32, 33], where the sequence likelihood typically increases sharply after the first exposure and gradually decreases towards the mean. Building on top of these observations, we show that LLMs not only memorize more data seen later in training, but also, to an extent that is detectable, retain a finer-grained pre-training data order. Of particular relevance to our observational setting is that language models tend to regurgitate memorized phrases (from training data) even in contexts different from the ones seen in training [34, 35, 36, 37, 38], making traces of training data and order detectable from samples as well.

## 3 Methods

## 3.1 Problem formulation and testing framework

Let X be the vocabulary. We define a language model µ ∈ ∆( X ∗ ) as a distribution over strings of text. We abstract a training algorithm A ∈ ∆( T ) as a distribution over transcripts α ∈ T , which capture the full execution trace of a training run. We adopt the following setup:

1. Alice runs a training algorithm that produces a transcript α , i.e., α ∼ A ;
2. Bob produces an artifact β ; and
3. Alice tests whether α ⊥ β .

The type of artifact determines the problem setting. In the query setting , Bob produces a language model β ∈ ∆( X ∗ ) ; in the observational setting , Bob merely produces text β ∈ X ∗ . Note that the observational setting is harder than the query setting since it provides strictly less information to Alice. In particular, if Alice has Bob's model then she can always generate text (given any prompt of her choosing) from the model herself. We will disambiguate the two cases by using µ β ∈ ∆( X ∗ ) to denote Bob's model and x β ∈ X ∗ to denote Bob's text.

Throughout the remainder of the paper, we equate a transcript with a set of strings indexed by their training order, i.e., α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 ∈ ( X ∗ × [ N ]) n for n, N ∈ N , since this is the only part of the training outcome relevant to our tests. We assume that Alice trains on randomly shuffled data, producing a shuffled transcript (Assumption A1).

Assumption A1. A transcript α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 ∈ ( X ∗ × [ N ]) n is shuffled if for any permutation σ : [ N ] → [ N ] the random variables { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 and { ( x i , σ ( t i )) } n i =1 are identically distributed.

Algorithm 1 abstracts a framework for obtaining exact p-values from arbitrary test statistics under Assumption A1, thus enabling provably exact control over false positive errors (Theorem 1). We will give concrete instantiations of various choices of test statistics for both the query and observational settings in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 respectively. A good test statistic should produce low p-values when Bob's artifact is not independent of Alice's transcript; in particular, we would like ϕ ( α, β ) to be abnormally large when α and β are not independent. Typically, we do not actually run Algorithm 1 in practice; rather, we efficiently simulate it (either exactly or approximately, depending on the test statistic) for large m to enable obtaining small p-values at no additional computational cost.

Theorem 1. Let A satisfy Assumption A1. Let α ∼ A and β ⊥ α . Then the output of Algorithm 1 is uniformly distributed over { ( j +1) / ( m +1) } j m =0 .

Proof. From our assumption on A , it follows that the collection { α j } j m =1 comprises m exchangeable copies of α . The independence of α and β thus implies { ( α j , β ) } j m =1 comprises m exchangeable

```
Input: Transcript α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 ; artifact β Parameters : test statistic ϕ ; number of permutations m Output: p-value ˆ p ∈ (0 , 1] 1 for j ∈ 1 , . . . , m do 2 σ j ∼ Unif ([ N ] → [ N ]) ; α j = { ( x i , σ j ( t i )) } N i =1 3 ϕ j ← ϕ ( α j , β ) 4 ˆ p ← 1 -1 m +1 (1 + ∑ m j =1 1 { ϕ j < ϕ ( α, β ) } ) // break ties randomly 5 return ˆ p
```

Algorithm 1: Obtaining p-values from arbitrary test statistics

copies of ( α, β ) . Because we break ties randomly, by symmetry it follows that ϕ ( α, β ) will have uniform rank among { ϕ j } j m =1 and thus ˆ p is uniformly distributed over { j +1 m +1 } j m =0 .

In practice, we generally do not use the full transcript, which may comprise billions of training examples; instead, to save time we typically randomly subsample elements of the transcript (without replacement) and run our tests using the subsampled transcript. So long as the subsampled transcript satisfies Definition A1 (which will be the case if Alice shuffled her data and we take a random subsample), our tests remain valid.

## 3.2 Query setting

In the query setting, we assume Alice can directly obtain log-likelihoods from Bob's model µ β for each training example. (Recall Bob's artifact β = µ β in the query setting.) She can then correlate these log-likelihoods with the ordering of examples in the transcript α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 to test for independence. In particular, with ρ denoting the Spearman rank correlation coefficient [39], let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We expect later-seen training examples to have higher likelihood according to Bob's model if it derives from Alice's training run, so we expect the statistic ϕ query to be positive if Bob's model is not independent and close to zero if it is independent of Alice's training run.

The null distribution of the Spearman correlation coefficient is a known quantity-in particular, if α ⊥ µ β then ϕ ( α, µ β ) from equation (1) follows a t-distribution with n -2 degrees of freedom. Thus, in our experiments instead of explicitly running Algorithm 1, we instead directly convert ϕ to a p-value using the closed form cumulative distribution function for the t-distribution. This enables us to obtain extremely low, exact p-values without being computationally bottlenecked.

Wecan increase the power of our test by controlling for natural variation in text likelihoods (some texts are inherently less predictable than others) using an independent reference model µ 0 . In particular, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The idea is to reduce the variance of the test statistic by subtracting the log-likelihood of the independent reference model. We can also regress the log-likelihood of Bob's model onto the reference model (and other features of text that may correlate with log-likelihood but are independent of Alice's training order) to better control for natural variation in text likelihood.

Finally, we can extend all of the test statistics in this section to the case where Alice only receives token predictions from Bob (instead of token probabilities) by first estimating token probabilities from Bob's predictions and then using these probabilities to apply the test statistics.

## 3.3 Observational setting

In the observational setting, we make no assumptions on how Bob generated the text x β that Alice observes. (Recall Bob's artifact β = x β in the observational setting.) Even if Bob did generate the text using a language model, we do not have access to the model and thus cannot compute its likelihood on her training examples as in the query setting. Instead, what we can do is compute the likelihood of Bob's text (or proxies thereof) under a collection of language models that we construct

to elicit correlations between Bob's text and Alice's example ordering. We take two approaches to constructing the collection by training models on either partitions or shuffles of Alice's transcript.

For the first approach (Algorithm 2, or ϕ part obs ), we train language models on different contiguous partitions of Alice's original ordered training data and correlate (some measure of) the likelihood of Bob's text under these models with their relative ordering. Motivated by previous work observing that language models sometimes regurgitate text verbatim from their training data [28, 29] and in particular are more likely to regurgitate text seen more recently in training [31, 32, 33], we use n-gram models and take χ to be either the likelihood of Bob's text under the model or the number of exact n-gram matches among Bob's text with the n-gram index underlying each model.

Algorithm 2: Training models on partitioned transcript ( ϕ part obs )

- Input: Transcript α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 ; text x β ∈ X ∗ Parameters : number of models k ; metric χ Output: test statistic ϕ part obs (Γ , β ) 1 Sort examples x by indices t 2 Split sorted x into x 1 , ..., x k contiguous partitions and train models µ 1 , ..., µ k on partitions 3 return ρ ( { χ ( µ j , x β ) , { j } k j =1 )

For the second approach (Algorithm 3, or ϕ shuff obs ), we train neural language models on different shuffles of Alice's original ordered training data to determine whether Bob's text has abnormally high likelihood under the original ordering. In practice, we use the same model architecture as Alice (so that µ 0 is Alice's model itself); we also repeat only a small fraction of her training run (e.g., the last 1 -10 %) to reduce computational costs. In our experiments, we take χ ( µ i , x β ) to either be the likelihood of Bob's text x β under the model µ i itself or the likelihood after finetuning each µ i on Bob's text, with the motivation of the latter approach being to improve the robustness of our test to Bob finetuning or otherwise modifying Alice's model.

Algorithm 3: Training models on shuffled transcript ( ϕ shuff

```
obs )
```

- Input: Transcript α = { ( x i , t i ) } n i =1 ; text x β ∈ X ∗ Parameters : number of models k ; metric χ Output: test statistic ϕ shuff obs (Γ , β ) 1 Sort examples x by indices t 2 Train model µ 0 on x (in sorted order) and models µ 1 , ..., µ k on independent reshuffles of x 3 µ ← (1 /k ) ∑ k i =1 χ ( µ i , x β ) ; σ ← √ (1 / ( k -1)) ∑ k i =1 ( χ ( µ i , x β ) -µ ) 2 4 return ( χ ( µ 0 , x β ) -µ ) /σ

Unlike the previous statistics, ϕ shuff obs does not apparently have a closed form output distribution under the null hypothesis. Obtaining exact p-values from ϕ shuff obs is possible via Algorithm 1 but would require retraining many models. Instead, in our experiments we report approximate p-values by treating the output of ϕ shuff obs as a z-score, and as a sanity check we report the degree to which these p-values empirically deviate from exact p-values under the null.

## 4 Experiments

## 4.1 Setup

Transcript ( α ). We use the ordered pretraining data from various open-source language models as Alice's transcript. We consider five families of models, each corresponding to a different pretraining dataset ranging from 300B to 4T tokens: (1) pythia : The Pile dataset used for training Pythia models [5]; (2) pythia-deduped : The deduped version of The Pile used for training Pythia-deduped models; (3) OLMo : Dolma v1.5 dataset used for training OLMo models [6]; (4) OLMo-1.7 : Dolma v1.7 dataset used for training OLMo-0424 and OLMo-0724 models; and (5) OLMo-2 : OLMo-Mix used for training the stage1 of OLMo-2-1124 models [7]. Additionally, we use TinyStories [40] to train small-scale models for ablations that would otherwise be prohibitively expensive, such as trying multiple epochs of training. We subsample sequences from each dataset to conduct our test (see Appendices A and B regarding sampling details for the query and observational settings respectively).

1

(c) Evaluating Pythia derivative models. For pythia-deduped , we try restricting queries to each epoch.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: We report results (all p-values in log 10 ) from ϕ ref query for 40 Pythia and OLMo derivative models in the query setting. We label each derivative model as { model size }-{ post-training method }-{ post-training dataset }.

Artifact ( β ). For Bob's artifact β , we use models that derive from one of the five families above or from our own TinyStories models. We vary the following factors when selecting the derivative models: (1) number of tokens on which the derived model has been finetuned, and (2) the type of finetuning, including supervised fine-tuning, preference optimization, and model souping.

## 4.2 Query setting

Test statistic ( ϕ ). We report p-values using ϕ query and ϕ ref query as we describe in Section 3.2.

Reference model ( µ 0 ). To implement ϕ ref query , we consider three types of reference models µ 0 : (1) models pre-trained on an (almost) identical training dataset as Alice's, but using a different order, such as using Pythia models trained on the non-deduped version of Pile as references for Pythia models trained on the deduped version; (2) models pre-trained on other training datasets, e.g., using OLMo models as references for Pythia models; and (3) an ensemble of models from (1) and (2). In particular, µ 0 must be known to be independent from Γ , in order to correctly test the indepenedence of µ and Γ . We present ablations on the type of reference model in Appendix A.5, and we find type (1) reference models yield the lowest p-values.

Results. Figure 2a displays the p-values we obtain over the number of tokens we query from the model (i.e., the size of the subsampled transcript multiplied by the number of tokens per example) when testing a model on its own training data (supposing Bob is using Alice's model without modification). For each of the five families, we use up to 1M 64-token sequences randomly sampled from the first epoch as our transcript α and evaluate the 7B-scale model checkpoint at the end of the first epoch. Crucially, though the actual correlation is typically small (between 0 . 001 and 0 . 1 ), the accuracy of the test increases with the number of queries; in other words, the effect size is small but statistically significant. Both ϕ query and ϕ ref query obtain extremely small p-values with enough queries, but using a reference model allows us to reduce the query amount by an order of magnitude while still obtaining comparable p-values. Incidentally, our results strongly suggest that pythia-2.8b-deduped , 6 a model commonly used by the research community to study training

6 https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b-deduped

6.9b-s

dynamics, was actually trained on the non-deduped version of Pile (with a p-value of 10 -60 ) rather than the deduped version, contrary to its documentation.

Based on these results, we fix the number of tokens we query to be 100k for pythia and 5M for OLMo , OLMo-1.7 , and OLMo-2 . In Figures 2b and 2c, we respectively test 12 HuggingFace models that are fine-tuned from an OLMo checkpoint and 29 models that are fine-tuned from a Pythia checkpoint. These models cover common post-training techniques including supervised finetuning, preference optimization, and model souping (i.e., averaging multiple finetuned model weights); see Appendix A.2 for details. For Pythia finetunes, whose base models were trained for between one and two epochs (with independently shuffled data for each epoch), we test using random subsamples of the full transcript as well as each epoch's transcript. For all but four of these finetunes, we obtain p-values of at most 10 -8 with at least one or both epochs (we can straighforwardly correct for multiple-testing by multiplying the p-values by 3 ). Notably, the four exceptions are all models at the smallest scale we test (1.4B), and the three models with p-values larger than 10 -5 all incur significantly higher pretraining loss (ranging from 4 . 5 to 5 . 6 ) relative to their underlying base model ( 3 ± 0 . 1 ); in these cases, Bob evades detection at the cost of significantly degrading the quality of his model relative to Alice. For OLMo finetunes, we obtain p-values less than 10 -4 in every case and less than 10 -13 in all but three cases. In all cases, we expect (based on Figure 2a) to be able to obtain even lower p-values with more queries.

Figure 2c already shows we are able to obtain low p-values for various Pythia derivatives by correlating their log-likelihood with the transcript of the first training epoch despite the fact that these models underwent a second (partial) epoch of training on reshuffled data. To further evaluate the effectiveness of our test on models trained for multiple epochs, we conduct a similar test with the OLMo and OLMo-1.7 7B models by using the first epoch's transcript to test the final checkpoints, which have respectively continued pretraining from the first epoch for 544B and 2300B tokens. We obtain a p-value below 10 -10 using 64M query tokens for OLMo and below 10 -4 using 256M tokens for OLMo-1.7 . Furthermore, to stress test the effectiveness of our methods on models trained for many epochs, in Appendix A.4 we try training our own models on the Tinystories dataset for up to 10 epochs (reshuffling the data for each epoch). We observe that the final models' log-likelihood exhibits statistically significant correlation with the transcripts of many (though not all) previous epochs; like a palimpsest, the ordering of previous epochs are inscribed into the model along with later ones.

Finally, we conduct additional experiments to simulate the case where Alice only receives next token predictions from Bob instead of token probabilities (e.g., supposing Bob maintains an API that returns text responses to arbitrary prompts) in Appendix A.6. We find we are able to obtain low p-values even when using just a single query to (roughly) estimate token probabilities, thus incurring minimal overhead in this more challenging setting. We perform a cost analysis of running our tests in Appendix D for various existing model APIs.

## 4.3 Observational Setting

Recall we consider two approaches in the observational setting based on partitioning ( ϕ part obs ) or reshuffling ( ϕ shuff obs ) Alice's original training data, training language models on these data and evaluating these models on Bob's text.

## 4.3.1 Partitioning the transcript

Test statistic ( ϕ ). We report p-values using ϕ part obs (Algorithm 2) as we describe in Section 3.3. We primarily experiment with a version of ϕ part obs using n-gram models ( n = 8 ) wherein we let χ count the number of exact matches among Bob's text with the n-gram index underlying each model and let k be the total number of minibatches in Alice's training run; in other words, we count the number of matching n-grams among Bob's text per each minibatch of training examples and correlate these counts with the minibatch order. See Appendix B.1 for additional implementation details.

Sampling text. Because the models we experiment with have limited context windows or are otherwise incapable of generating long, coherent texts, to obtain Bob's text x β we independently generate short texts then group these texts together (i.e., we treat x β as a collection of distinct documents and use | x β | to denote the total number of tokens across all documents). We generate these texts as continuations of prefixes from The Pile [41] dataset and vary the sampling temperature. Each prefix has 16 tokens and each continuation is at most 128 tokens.

Results. We experiment with Pythia models, whose n-gram training index (the dictionary mapping n-grams to batches) we can build with reasonable disk space (1.4TB) and query efficiently with the infini-gram code base [42]. We index a subsample of the transcript for the first 100K training batches and run our test on text we sample from subsequent training checkpoints up to the full 143K batches (treating the later checkpoints as finetunes). Because the test is costly to run for large numbers of tokens, we do not evaluate the full set of Pythia derivative models from earlier.

Table 1: We report median p-values and interquartile ranges over 10 trials from applying ϕ part obs to text sampled from pythia-6.9b-deduped checkpoints. Because sampling is expensive, for each trial we resample generations with replacement from an initial sample of 800K generations (i.e., 25.6M tokens), so the reported ranges are likely narrow.

| step   | &#124; x β &#124; = 640K                           | 1.28M                                              | 3.20M                                            | 6.40M                                            | 12.8M                                              | 19.2M                                              |
|--------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| 100K   | 3 . 0 × 10 - 1 ( 8 . 6 × 10 - 2 , 5 . 4 × 10 - 1 ) | 2 . 5 × 10 - 2 ( 1 . 2 × 10 - 2 , 5 . 3 × 10 - 2 ) | 2 . 2 × 10 - 2 ( 3 . 7 × 10 - 3 , 1 . 1 × 10 - 1 | 2 . 0 × 10 - 3 ( 1 . 1 × 10 - 3 , 4 . 0 × 10 - 3 | 6 . 3 × 10 - 4 ( 8 . 2 × 10 - 5 , 1 . 3 × 10 - 3 ) | 2 . 6 × 10 - 4 ( 1 . 4 × 10 - 4 , 3 . 0 × 10 - 4 ) |
| 110K   | 3 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 , 7 . 1 × 10 - 1 ) | 2 . 6 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 1 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 3 × 10 - 1 ) | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1 ( 6 . 7 × 10 - 2 , 2 . 4 × 10 - 1 | 9 . 3 × 10 - 2 ( 8 . 7 × 10 - 2 , 2 . 8 × 10 - 1 | 6 . 9 × 10 - 2 ( 3 . 9 × 10 - 2 , 8 . 3 × 10 - 2 ) | 4 . 4 × 10 - 2 ( 3 . 3 × 10 - 2 , 6 . 4 × 10 - 2 ) |
| 120K   | 4 . 5 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 9 × 10 - 1 , 5 . 9 × 10 - 1 ) | 3 . 0 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 4 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 4 × 10 - 1 ) | 3 . 9 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 3 × 10 - 1 , 5 . 1 × 10 - 1 | 8 . 4 × 10 - 2 ( 2 . 8 × 10 - 2 , 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 | 7 . 4 × 10 - 2 ( 1 . 2 × 10 - 2 , 1 . 2 × 10 - 1 ) | 8 . 7 × 10 - 2 ( 3 . 5 × 10 - 2 , 1 . 4 × 10 - 1 ) |
| 130K   | 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 3 . 3 × 10 - 2 , 4 . 5 × 10 - 1 ) | 5 . 1 × 10 - 1 ( 4 . 6 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 2 × 10 - 1 ) | 4 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 , 8 . 5 × 10 - 1 | 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 1 . 0 × 10 - 1 , 4 . 2 × 10 - 1 | 1 . 0 × 10 - 1 ( 4 . 8 × 10 - 2 , 1 . 5 × 10 - 1 ) | 4 . 4 × 10 - 2 ( 4 . 1 × 10 - 2 , 1 . 1 × 10 - 1 ) |
| 143K   | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1 ( 2 . 9 × 10 - 1 , 7 . 8 × 10 - 1 ) | 5 . 6 × 10 - 1 ( 3 . 3 × 10 - 1 , 7 . 0 × 10 - 1 ) | 3 . 9 × 10 - 1 ( 3 . 2 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 7 × 10 - 1 | 4 . 2 × 10 - 1 ( 2 . 4 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 0 × 10 - 1 | 4 . 3 × 10 - 1 ( 2 . 8 × 10 - 1 , 6 . 6 × 10 - 1 ) | 2 . 9 × 10 - 1 ( 2 . 0 × 10 - 1 , 5 . 9 × 10 - 1 ) |

In Table 1, even when testing the checkpoint corresponding to the end of the transcript (i.e., supposing Bob uses Alice's model directly) we require several hundred thousand tokens before we begin to observe consistently low p-values. These results suggest it is infeasible to use this test to detect when Bob is generating short snippets of text (e.g., social media posts) using Alice's model. However, we posit the test may be useful for larger-scale, ecosystem level analyses such as allowing Alice to estimate the total fraction of text on a social media platform that derives from her model. Moreover, the test is able to withstand a substantial amount of finetuning: with enough tokens, we observe decreasing p-values even after 30K steps (i.e., when Bob continues training Alice's model for up to 30% of its original pretraining budget).

We report additional results in Appendix B, varying the sampling parameters and token count. We find the p-values we obtain are somewhat sensitive to temperature. Notably, the power of our test diminishes substantially when generating text unconditionally with low temperature, which we attribute to low diversity among the generated texts.

## 4.3.2 Shuffling the transcript

Test statistic ( ϕ ). We report p-values using ϕ shuff obs (Algorithm 2) as we describe in Section 3.3. We use the same model architecture as Alice and continue training from an intermediate checkpoint. We let χ be the likelihood of Bob's text under each model, either with or without finetuning the model on Bob's text. See Appendix B.2 for additional implementation details.

Sampling text. As before, to obtain Bob's text x β we independently generate short texts then group these texts together. We generate these texts as continuations of prefixes from the TinyStories test set. Each prefix has 20 tokens and each continuation is at most 32 tokens long.

Results. Running ϕ shuff obs requires retraining many models on reshuffled data, which is costly at scale. Thus, we conduct most of our experiments with small (3M) models we train ourselves on 500K documents from the Tinystories dataset. We vary three main factors: 1) the amount of data on which we retrain (ranging from the last 10-50K documents-i.e., the last 2-10% of training); 2) the amount of data (also sampled from the TinyStories dataset) on which Bob finetunes; and 3) the amount of text Bob generates. Unlike the tests in the previous section, the output of ϕ shuff obs is not an exact p-value but rather a z-score; nonetheless, for the sake of comparison to previous results, we report approximate p-values we obtain by converting z-scores to p-values under the assumption that the score distribution is normal. We defer the full details of our training and finetuning setup to Appendix B.2. We demonstrate the validity of our approximate p-values by empirically estimating their null distribution in Appendix B.5.

Even with retraining on as little as the last 2% of Alice's pretraining data, we are able to obtain p-values less than 10 -3 from as few as 320 tokens in Bob's text (Figure 3, left panel). Moreover,

Figure 3: We report approximate p-values from applying ϕ shuff obs to TinyStories models, varying the number of tokens in Bob's text. (Left) We vary the amount of data we use to retrain the test models; we let χ be the log-likelihood of Bob's text under each model (no finetuning) and assume Bob uses Alice's model without modification. (Right) We fix the amount of retraining at 2% of Alice's pretraining data and vary the amount of data on which Bob finetunes Alice's model; we try ϕ shuff obs with (solid) and without (dashed) finetuning on Bob's text.

<!-- image -->

finetuning the retrained test models on Bob's text before evaluating their log-likelihood substantially improves the robustness of the test to Bob finetuning Alice's model (Figure 3, right panel); however, we require substantially more tokens in order to see a tangible benefit, and even with 32000 tokens both versions of the test lose power once Bob finetunes on as many documents as 1% of Alice's pretraining run. We include additional sweeps and ablations in Appendix B.4; notably, we find retraining the test models on more tokens improves the robustness of the test to finetuning.

To extend beyond toy experiments, we leverage existing OLMo 2 checkpoints-from the cooldown phase of their pretraining run-trained on different random shuffles of the same 50B tokens (representing roughly 1% of the pretraining data). In particular, there are three such checkpoints for both OLMo-2-0425-1B and OLMo-2-1124-7B . We use these checkpoints to simulate running ϕ shuff obs with k = 2 (and no finetuning on Bob's text) by generating text from one of the checkpoints (using the same setup and prompt distribution as in the previous experiment on TinyStories) and treating the other two checkpoints as test models. Given 640 tokens of Bob's text, we obtain median p-values (with interquartile ranges parenthesized) of 6 . 25 × 10 -3 (6 . 44 × 10 -5 , 1 . 44 × 10 -1 ) at the 1B scale and 1 . 44 × 10 -3 (1 . 01 × 10 -6 , 6 . 00 × 10 -2 ) at the 7B scale; using only two test models makes the p-values more volatile. Additional results are in Appendix B.6.

## 5 Discussion

We develop exact tests that enable language model providers and developers to determine: 1) whether another language model is trained independently of their model and 2) whether a text is generated independently of their model. Our tests are transparent and noninvasive by design, and we evaluate their effectiveness with a number of models across a range of scales and training recipes. We presently remark on some limitations and directions for future work.

Recall that we assume the role of Alice, so we have access to Alice's training data in order to carry out our tests. In practice, model developers (including developers of open-weight models) may be reluctant to disclose their training data due to concerns around copyright liability or competitive advantage (of course, any model developer can still use our tests internally). To enable independent third-party verification of test results under these circumstances, we propose running our tests using a subset of the transcript that the model developer is willing to disclose (e.g., the relative ordering of Wikipedia documents in the pretraining data).

All our tests are somewhat costly to run, either because they require many tokens from Bob to be effective or retraining a collection of language models. Bringing these costs down is an important direction for future work. Particularly in the observational setting, where Alice cannot simply spend more queries to obtain more tokens, designing more lightweight tests than ϕ shuff obs with similar token complexity is an important open problem.

Finally, beyond our specific problem setting, our experiments yield new insights into memorization in language models. Exploring the implications of these findings on issues of privacy and copyright and for designing more effective models an exciting direction for future work.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Jiacheng Liu and Pete Walsh for their help on reconstructing the OLMo training data. This research is supported in part by grants from Google and Open Philanthropy.

## References

- [1] Merriam-Webster. Definition of palimpsest. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary . URL https: //www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/palimpsest .
- [2] Meta. Meta Llama 3 Community License Agreement, 2024. URL https://www.llama.com/ llama3/license/ .
- [3] Jiashu Xu, Fei Wang, Mingyu Ma, Pang Wei Koh, Chaowei Xiao, and Muhao Chen. Instructional Fingerprinting of Large Language Models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard, editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3277-3306, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.180. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long. 180/ .
- [4] Pratyush Maini, Mohammad Yaghini, and Nicolas Papernot. Dataset Inference: Ownership Resolution in Machine Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hvdKKV2yt7T .
- [5] Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O'Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A Suite for Analyzing Large Language Models across Training and Scaling. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2397-2430. PMLR, 2023.
- [6] Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Evan Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, Shane Arora, David Atkinson, Russell Authur, Khyathi Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Yuling Gu, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, William Merrill, Jacob Morrison, Niklas Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew Peters, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Saurabh Shah, William Smith, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Mitchell Wortsman, Pradeep Dasigi, Nathan Lambert, Kyle Richardson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jesse Dodge, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Noah Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. OLMo: Accelerating the science of language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15789-15809, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.841. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024. acl-long.841/ .
- [7] Evan Pete Walsh, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Shane Arora, Akshita Bhagia, Yuling Gu, Shengyi Huang, Matt Jordan, Nathan Lambert, Dustin Schwenk, Oyvind Tafjord, Taira Anderson, David Atkinson, Faeze Brahman, Christopher Clark, Pradeep Dasigi, Nouha Dziri, Allyson Ettinger, Michal Guerquin, David Heineman, Hamish Ivison, Pang Wei Koh, Jiacheng Liu, Saumya Malik, William Merrill, Lester James Validad Miranda, Jacob Morrison, Tyler Murray, Crystal Nam, Jake Poznanski, Valentina Pyatkin, Aman Rangapur, Michael Schmitz, Sam Skjonsberg, David Wadden, Christopher Wilhelm, Michael Wilson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Ali Farhadi, Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2 OLMo 2 furious (COLM's version). In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=2ezugTT9kU .
- [8] Daryna Oliynyk, Rudolf Mayer, and Andreas Rauber. I Know What You Trained Last Summer: A Survey on Stealing Machine Learning Models and Defences. ACM Computing Surveys , 55:1 - 41, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249848185 .
- [9] Junchao Wu, Shu Yang, Runzhe Zhan, Yulin Yuan, Lidia Sam Chao, and Derek Fai Wong. A survey on LLM-generated text detection: Necessity, methods, and future directions. Computational Linguistics , 51(1):275-338, March 2025. doi: 10.1162/coli\_a\_00549. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.cl-1.8/ .

- [10] Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Laks Lakshmanan, and Dujian Ding. LLM performance predictors are good initializers for architecture search. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 10540-10560, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.627. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.627/ .
- [11] Soumya Suvra, Ghosal, Souradip Chakraborty, Jonas Geiping, Furong Huang, Dinesh Manocha, and A. S. Bedi. A Survey on the Possibilities &amp; Impossibilities of AI-generated Text Detection. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310. 15264 .
- [12] Jiashu Xu, Fei Wang, Mingyu Ma, Pang Wei Koh, Chaowei Xiao, and Muhao Chen. Instructional fingerprinting of large language models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard, editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3277-3306, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.180. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long. 180/ .
- [13] Jie Zhang, Dongrui Liu, Chen Qian, Linfeng Zhang, Yong Liu, Yu Qiao, and Jing Shao. REEF: Representation Encoding Fingerprints for Large Language Models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=SnDmPkOJ0T .
- [14] Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Protecting Language Generation Models via Invisible Watermarking. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML'23. JMLR.org, 2023.
- [15] Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, Yi Zeng, Lingjuan Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, Jiwei Li, and Ruoxi Jia. CATER: Intellectual Property Protection on Text Generation APIs via Conditional Watermarks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , 2022.
- [16] Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, Lingjuan Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, and Chenguang Wang. Protecting intellectual property of language generation APIs with lexical watermark. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2022.
- [17] Ivica Nikolic, Teodora Baluta, and Prateek Saxena. Model Provenance Testing for Large Language Models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00706 .
- [18] Heng Jin, Chaoyu Zhang, Shanghao Shi, Wenjing Lou, and Y. Thomas Hou. ProFLingo: A Fingerprinting-based Intellectual Property Protection Scheme for Large Language Models. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS) , pages 1-9, 2024. doi: 10.1109/CNS62487.2024.10735575.
- [19] Sally Zhu, Ahmed M Ahmed, Rohith Kuditipudi, and Percy Liang. Independence Tests for Language Models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=mzSwYvwYdC .
- [20] Boyi Zeng, Lizheng Wang, Yuncong Hu, Yi Xu, Chenghu Zhou, Xinbing Wang, Yu Yu, and Zhouhan Lin. HuRef: HUman-REadable Fingerprint for Large Language Models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=RlZgnEZsOH .
- [21] Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. DetectGPT: Zero-Shot Machine-Generated Text Detection using Probability Curvature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11305 , 2023.
- [22] Abhimanyu Hans, Avi Schwarzschild, Valeriia Cherepanova, Hamid Kazemi, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Spotting LLMs With Binoculars: ZeroShot Detection of Machine-Generated Text, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401. 12070 .

- [23] Scott Aaronson and Hendrik Kirchner. Watermarking GPT Outputs, 2023.
- [24] John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A Watermark for Large Language Models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 17061-17084. PMLR, 23-29 Jul 2023. URL https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v202/kirchenbauer23a.html .
- [25] Miranda Christ, Sam Gunn, and Or Zamir. Undetectable Watermarks for Language Models. In Shipra Agrawal and Aaron Roth, editors, Proceedings of Thirty Seventh Conference on Learning Theory , volume 247 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1125-1139. PMLR, 30 Jun-03 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v247/christ24a.html .
- [26] Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robust Distortionfree Watermarks for Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15593 .
- [27] Chenchen Gu, Xiang Lisa Li, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. On the Learnability of Watermarks for Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9k0krNzvlV .
- [28] Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The Secret Sharer: Evaluating and Testing Unintended Memorization in Neural Networks. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19) , pages 267-284, Santa Clara, CA, August 2019. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-06-9. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/ usenixsecurity19/presentation/carlini .
- [29] Kushal Tirumala, Aram H. Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Memorization Without Overfitting: Analyzing the Training Dynamics of Large Language Models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=u3vEuRr08MT .
- [30] Matthew Jagielski, Om Thakkar, Florian Tramer, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Nicholas Carlini, Eric Wallace, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Chiyuan Zhang. Measuring Forgetting of Memorized Training Examples. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=7bJizxLKrR .
- [31] Pietro Lesci, Clara Meister, Thomas Hofmann, Andreas Vlachos, and Tiago Pimentel. Causal estimation of memorisation profiles. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15616-15635, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.834. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.834/ .
- [32] Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and Minjoon Seo. How Do Large Language Models Acquire Factual Knowledge During Pretraining? In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TYdzj1EvBP .
- [33] Jing Huang, Diyi Yang, and Christopher Potts. Demystifying verbatim memorization in large language models. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10711-10732, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.598. URL https://aclanthology.org/ 2024.emnlp-main.598/ .
- [34] Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramer, Milad Nasr, Chiyuan Zhang, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Christopher Choquette Choo, and Nicholas Carlini. Preventing generation of verbatim memorization in language models gives a false sense of privacy. In C. Maria Keet, Hung-Yi Lee,

and Sina Zarrieß, editors, Proceedings of the 16th International Natural Language Generation Conference , pages 28-53, Prague, Czechia, September 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.inlg-main.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023. inlg-main.3/ .

- [35] Antonia Karamolegkou, Jiaang Li, Li Zhou, and Anders Søgaard. Copyright violations and large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7403-7412, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023. emnlp-main.458. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.458/ .
- [36] Michael Aerni, Javier Rando, Edoardo Debenedetti, Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, and Florian Tramèr. Measuring Non-Adversarial Reproduction of Training Data in Large Language Models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=590yfqz1LE .
- [37] Aly M. Kassem, Omar Mahmoud, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Hyunwoo Kim, Yulia Tsvetkov, Yejin Choi, Sherif Saad, and Santu Rana. ALPACA AGAINST VICUNA: Using LLMs to uncover memorization of LLMs. In Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8296-8321, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.421/ .
- [38] Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Skyler Hallinan, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Jiacheng Liu, Seungju Han, Allyson Ettinger, Liwei Jiang, Khyathi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, and Yejin Choi. AI as humanity's salieri: Quantifying linguistic creativity of language models via systematic attribution of machine text against web text. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ilOEOIqolQ .
- [39] C. Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. The American Journal of Psychology , 15(1):72-101, 1904. ISSN 00029556. URL http://www.jstor.org/ stable/1412159 .
- [40] Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. TinyStories: How Small Can Language Models Be and Still Speak Coherent English?, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07759 .
- [41] Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The Pile: An 800GB dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2101.00027 . arXiv:2101.00027.
- [42] Jiacheng Liu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Infini-gram: Scaling Unbounded n-gram Language Models to a Trillion Tokens. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=u2vAyMeLMm .
- [43] Pinzhen Chen, Shaoxiong Ji, Nikolay Bogoychev, Andrey Kutuzov, Barry Haddow, and Kenneth Heafield. Monolingual or multilingual instruction tuning: Which makes a better alpaca. In Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2024 , pages 1347-1356, St. Julian's, Malta, March 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-eacl. 90/ .
- [44] Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. How Far Can Camels Go? Exploring the State of Instruction Tuning on Open Resources. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS '23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc.

## Technical Appendices and Supplementary Material

## A Query Setting Experimental Details and Additional Results

## A.1 Query distribution

When sampling sequences from Alice's training dataset to construct queries from her transcript α , we vary the following hyperparameters: (1) the length of the sequence L , (2) the training step s at which the sequence occurs (the last training step in case a sequence occurs multiple times in training), and (3) the start token position t of the sequence in the original training example.

All three hyperparameters affect the computation of likelihood used in ϕ ref query . Specifically, given a sequence of L tokens x s,t , . . . , x s,t + L , we compute the average language modeling loss ℓ (i.e., negative log-likelihood) across all tokens as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We provide the experiment details below on OLMo-7B . Overall, we observe that for a fixed number of sampled tokens (i.e., the number of sampled sequences × the length of the sequence), sampling from the first few tokens of each training example, i.e., t = 0 , and using sequences that occur closer to the testing checkpoint provide the strongest memorization signals. As we discussed in Section 5, these results also provide insights into LLM memorization behaviors, characterizing which sequences are more likely to be memorized by the model.

## p-valuevs.#Sampled Tokens

Figure 4: We vary the sequence length and number of sequences in the transcript Γ in computing ϕ ref query for OLMo-7B . P-values are affected by the total number of tokens Γ and the training step at which the sequence occurs, i.e., Epoch 1 sequences provide more signals than Epoch 0 sequences.

<!-- image -->

Sequence length. We measure how sequence length affects our test results using ϕ ref query in Figure 4. Given a fixed number of sequence samples, increasing the sequence length L leads to a smaller p-value, i.e., for each column, p-value decreases as we move from top to bottom. However, given a fixed budget of tokens, sequence length has no significant effect on the p-value. We can see the diagonal trend of low p-values from the Epoch 1 samples (and slightly in the Epoch 0 samples). Hence, the total number of tokens in α is most relevant in the value of ϕ ref query , rather than the number of sequences or sequence length individually.

Training step. Comparing Figure 4 Left and Right, we show that samples from Epoch 1 yield smaller p-values given the same sample size, suggesting sequences seen later in training are more likely to be memorized by the model.

Start token position. OLMo-7B uses a context window of 2048 tokens, so we can ablate the position of the tokens of sampled text. We sample 64-token sequences starting at position t = 0 / 256 / 512 / 1024 / 1536 / 1920 . Figure 5 shows that sampling sequences at position 0 have the strongest memorization signals across all sampling sizes.

## A.2 Finetuning results

We provide the raw results for the fine-tuned models shown in Section 4.2, Figure 2b and 2c.

Figure 5: We vary the sample token position and number of queries in computing ϕ ref query for OLMo-7B models. Sampling from the start of an sequence consistently yields smaller p-value across all sample size.

<!-- image -->

We evaluate ϕ ref query on models from HuggingFace against the pythia and pythia-deduped models of different sizes. For each of the listed models, we use transcripts (training orders) of pythia , pythia-deduped , pythia-deduped Epoch 0, and pythia-deduped Epoch 1. In Table 2,3 we evaluate Pythia model derivatives and in Table 4 we evaluate non-derivatives, such as OLMo family models. In Table 5, we evaluate OLMo fine-tuned models using transcripts of OLMo , OLMo-1.7 , OLMo-2 . The transcript α consists of 100k randomly sampled sequences of length 64 for Pythia and 1M sequences for OLMo (except for OLMo-1.7 , for which we use 5M sequences since the training order of the second epoch is not available. Instead we must use samples from the first epoch, which have weaker memorization effects).

Table 2: We compute p-values using ϕ ref query for different Pythia base model variants [5].

|                                       | p-value w.r.t. different training data order   | p-value w.r.t. different training data order   | p-value w.r.t. different training data order   | p-value w.r.t. different training data order   |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Model Name                            | pythia                                         | pythia-deduped                                 | Epoch 0                                        | Epoch 1                                        |
| Base Models Trained on pythia         |                                                |                                                |                                                |                                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b                | 9 . 6 × 10 - 24                                | 1 . 5 × 10 - 1                                 | 9 . 3 × 10 - 1                                 | 3 . 3 × 10 - 1                                 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b                | 5 . 1 × 10 - 62                                | 3 . 5 × 10 - 1                                 | 8 . 2 × 10 - 1                                 | 7 . 8 × 10 - 1                                 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b                | 4 . 2 × 10 - 142                               | -                                              | -                                              | -                                              |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-v0             | 2 . 0 × 10 - 67                                | 1 . 6 × 10 - 2                                 | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1                                 | 8 . 0 × 10 - 2                                 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-12b                 | 1 . 3 × 10 - 184                               | 9 . 5 × 10 - 1                                 | 4 . 1 × 10 - 1                                 | 4 . 8 × 10 - 1                                 |
| Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped |                                                |                                                |                                                |                                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b-deduped        | 9 . 6 × 10 - 1                                 | 5 . 4 × 10 - 23                                | 9 . 3 × 10 - 13                                | 1 . 8 × 10 - 14                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b-deduped-v0     | 3 . 6 × 10 - 1                                 | 1 . 0 × 10 - 12                                | 2 . 7 × 10 - 10                                | 4 . 4 × 10 - 5                                 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b-deduped        | 1 . 2 × 10 - 60                                | 9 . 1 × 10 - 1                                 | 9 . 1 × 10 - 1                                 | 8 . 1 × 10 - 1                                 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b-deduped-v0     | 7 . 3 × 10 - 1                                 | 3 . 3 × 10 - 79                                | 7 . 1 × 10 - 54                                | 1 . 4 × 10 - 34                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped        | -                                              | 7 . 7 × 10 - 135                               | 1 . 8 × 10 - 173                               | 1 . 2 × 10 - 38                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped-v0     | 7 . 4 × 10 - 1                                 | 9 . 3 × 10 - 60                                | 1 . 3 × 10 - 236                               | 5 . 7 × 10 - 228                               |
| EleutherAI/pythia-12b-deduped         | 9 . 3 × 10 - 1                                 | 7 . 6 × 10 - 158                               | 2 . 5 × 10 - 233                               | 4 . 3 × 10 - 23                                |
| EleutherAI/pythia-12b-deduped-v0      | 4 . 5 × 10 - 1                                 | 2 . 5 × 10 - 86                                | 0 . 0 × 10 0                                   | 3 . 7 × 10 - 301                               |

The p-values of running ϕ ref query with the different transcripts are reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5. The blue boxes highlight p-values that are less than 10 -2 .

As we discussed in Section 4.2, pythia-2.8b-deduped has a non-significant p-value with the pythia-deduped training order, but a p-value of 1 . 2 × 10 -60 with the pythia transcript, i.e., the non-deduped data used to train pythia-2.8b , which suggests there is likely mislabeling of the HuggingFace model.

Table 3: We compute p-values using ϕ ref query for different Pythia fine-tuned model variants [5, 43, 44]. Fine-tuned models are listed in the same order as in Figure 2c from left to right.

|                                                                       | p-value w.r.t. different training data order                 | p-value w.r.t. different training data order                 | p-value w.r.t. different training data order                 | p-value w.r.t. different training data order                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Model Name                                                            | pythia                                                       | pythia-deduped                                               | Epoch 0                                                      | Epoch 1                                                      |
| Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia                  | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia         | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia         | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia         | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia         |
| herMaster/pythia1.4B-finetuned-on-                                    | 7 . 4 × 10 - 9                                               | 3 . 2 × 10 - 1                                               | 2 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lamini-docs                                                           | lamini-docs                                                  | lamini-docs                                                  | lamini-docs                                                  | lamini-docs                                                  |
| LinguaCustodia/fin-pythia-1.4b                                        | 6 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 6 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 6 . 1 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/pythia-1.4b-helpful-sft                                      | 3 . 8 × 10 - 16                                              | 5 . 6 × 10 - 2                                               | 2 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               | 8 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               |
| Leogrin/eleuther-pythia1b-hh-sft                                      | 1 . 9 × 10 - 9                                               | 1 . 7 × 10 - 1                                               | 1 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 1 × 10 - 1                                               |
| kykim0/pythia-1.4b-tulu-v2-mix                                        | 3 . 3 × 10 - 1                                               | 3 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 3 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 8 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/pythia-1.4b-helpful-dpo                                      | 9 . 4 × 10 - 20                                              | 1 . 4 × 10 - 2                                               | 1 . 2 × 10 - 1                                               | 9 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/eleuther-pythia6.9b-hh-sft                                   | 4 . 9 × 10 - 125                                             | 2 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 2 × 10 - 1                                               | 9 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               |
| allenai/open-instruct-pythia-6.9b-tulu                                | 4 . 8 × 10 - 27                                              | 2 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               | 8 . 6 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               |
| pkarypis/pythia-ultrachat                                             | 1 . 3 × 10 - 58                                              | 2 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 6 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/eleuther-pythia6.9b-hh-dpo                                   | 1 . 5 × 10 - 132                                             | 6 . 3 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 2 × 10 - 1                                               |
| usvsnsp/pythia-6.9b-ppo                                               | 6 . 4 × 10 - 96                                              | 6 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               | 6 . 6 × 10 - 1                                               | 2 . 7 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/eleuther-pythia12b-hh-sft                                    | 4 . 9 × 10 - 144                                             | 8 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 7 . 7 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lomahony/eleuther-pythia12b-hh-dpo                                    | 2 . 6 × 10 - 161                                             | 9 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 6 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               |
| Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped          | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on pythia-deduped |
| naxautify/pythia-1.4b-deduped-8k                                      | 9 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 4 . 9 × 10 - 6                                               | 2 . 9 × 10 - 3                                               | 4 . 7 × 10 - 2                                               |
| HWERI/pythia-1.4b-deduped-sharegpt                                    | 8 . 3 × 10 - 1                                               | 1 . 7 × 10 - 16                                              | 2 . 2 × 10 - 5                                               | 1 . 2 × 10 - 5                                               |
| lambdalabs/pythia-1.4b-deduped- synthetic-instruct                    | 8 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               | 2 . 7 × 10 - 2                                               | 9 . 5 × 10 - 2                                               | 1 . 5 × 10 - 1                                               |
| trl-lib/pythia-1b-deduped-tldr-sft                                    | 4 . 2 × 10 - 1                                               | 3 . 4 × 10 - 15                                              | 4 . 3 × 10 - 3                                               | 4 . 0 × 10 - 9                                               |
| lambdalabs/pythia-6.9b-deduped_alpaca                                 | 9 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 7 . 8 × 10 - 24                                              | 2 . 5 × 10 - 34                                              | 4 . 1 × 10 - 4                                               |
| EleutherAI/pythia-intervention-6.9b- deduped                          | 6 . 4 × 10 - 2                                               | 5 . 1 × 10 - 137                                             | 4 . 0 × 10 - 170                                             | 6 . 1 × 10 - 34                                              |
| cc0de/EleutherAI-pythia-6.9b-deduped-                                 | 5 . 6 × 10 - 1                                               | 3 . 0 × 10 - 96                                              | 2 . 0 × 10 - 106                                             | 3 . 3 × 10 - 32                                              |
| full-ft-clinical-bsz16-lr5e-06 pszemraj/pythia-6.9b-HC3               | 9 . 4 × 10 - 1                                               | 2 . 3 × 10 - 3                                               | 1 . 6 × 10 - 9                                               | 6 . 1 × 10 - 16                                              |
| dvruette/oasst-pythia-6.9b-4000-steps                                 | 8 . 8 × 10 - 1                                               | 2 . 4 × 10 - 8                                               | 1 . 0 × 10 - 20                                              | 1 . 4 × 10 - 24                                              |
| CarperAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped-4k                                       | 8 . 9 × 10 - 1                                               | 9 . 0 × 10 - 56                                              | 3 . 4 × 10 - 129                                             | 5 . 8 × 10 - 1                                               |
| lambdalabs/pythia-6.9b-deduped- synthetic-instruct                    | 5 . 3 × 10 - 1                                               | 1 . 6 × 10 - 12                                              | 2 . 1 × 10 - 31                                              | 1 . 9 × 10 - 31                                              |
| HuggingFaceH4/EleutherAI_pythia-                                      | 3 . 0 × 10 - 1                                               | 1 . 2 × 10 - 69                                              | 4 . 2 × 10 - 79                                              | 3 . 6 × 10 - 18                                              |
| 6.9b-deduped__sft__tldr trl-lib/pythia-6.9b-deduped-tldr- offline-dpo | 1 . 6 × 10 - 1                                               | 1 . 1 × 10 - 83                                              | 7 . 3 × 10 - 92                                              | 2 . 6 × 10 - 20                                              |
| OpenAssistant/pythia-12b-sft-v8-7k-steps                              | 5 . 7 × 10 - 1                                               | 3 . 8 × 10 - 53                                              | 1 . 4 × 10 - 90                                              | 3 . 9 × 10 - 5                                               |
| lambdalabs/pythia-12b-deduped- synthetic-instruct                     | 9 . 6 × 10 - 1                                               | 5 . 9 × 10 - 36                                              | 3 . 6 × 10 - 115                                             | 2 . 4 × 10 - 108                                             |
| OpenAssistant/pythia-12b-sft-v8-rlhf- 2k-steps                        | 4 . 8 × 10 - 1                                               | 7 . 1 × 10 - 54                                              | 2 . 9 × 10 - 88                                              | 2 . 0 × 10 - 5                                               |

Table 4: We compute p-values using ϕ ref query for models that are not trained on pythia or pythia-deduped . All p-values are above 0.1, indicting the null hypothesis is true, which matches the ground truth.

|                                                  | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order     | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order     | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order     | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order     |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Model Name                                       | pythia                                           | pythia-deduped                                   | Epoch 0                                          | Epoch 1                                          |
| Base Models Trained on Neither of the Two Orders | Base Models Trained on Neither of the Two Orders | Base Models Trained on Neither of the Two Orders | Base Models Trained on Neither of the Two Orders | Base Models Trained on Neither of the Two Orders |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped-v0 -seed42        | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1                                   | 5 . 4 × 10 - 1                                   | 8 . 5 × 10 - 1                                   | 4 . 9 × 10 - 1                                   |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-hf                               | 7 . 9 × 10 - 1                                   | 5 . 8 × 10 - 1                                   | 6 . 4 × 10 - 1                                   | 6 . 5 × 10 - 1                                   |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0424-hf                          | 7 . 6 × 10 - 1                                   | 5 . 7 × 10 - 1                                   | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1                                   | 2 . 8 × 10 - 1                                   |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0724-hf                          | 8 . 8 × 10 - 1                                   | 6 . 3 × 10 - 1                                   | 6 . 6 × 10 - 1                                   | 3 . 1 × 10 - 1                                   |
| allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B                           | 1 . 5 × 10 - 1                                   | 2 . 9 × 10 - 1                                   | 6 . 1 × 10 - 1                                   | 2 . 3 × 10 - 1                                   |
| meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B                       | 2 . 3 × 10 - 1                                   | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1                                   | 7 . 8 × 10 - 1                                   | 5 . 4 × 10 - 1                                   |

## A.3 Continued pretraining results

We provide additional analysis for continued pretraining in Section 4.2 on Pythia models. Specifically, we choose a base checkpoint A of pythia-deduped (e.g., the step100000 checkpoint) and a finetune

Table 5: We compute p-values using ϕ ref query for different OLMo model variants.

| Model                                                  | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order           | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order           | P-Value w.r.t. Different Training Data Order           |
|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Name                                                   | OLMo                                                   | OLMo-1.7                                               | OLMo-2                                                 |
| Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo     | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo     | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo     | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo     |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-SFT-hf                                 | 1 . 9 × 10 - 27                                        | 3 . 8 × 10 - 1                                         | 7 . 9 × 10 - 1                                         |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-Instruct-hf                            | 1 . 3 × 10 - 23                                        | 9 . 3 × 10 - 1                                         | 9 . 6 × 10 - 1                                         |
| Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-1.7 | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-1.7 | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-1.7 | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-1.7 |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0424-SFT-hf                            | 8 . 2 × 10 - 1                                         | 7 . 7 × 10 - 24                                        | 6 . 5 × 10 - 1                                         |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0424-Instruct-hf                       | 8 . 4 × 10 - 1                                         | 4 . 0 × 10 - 24                                        | 7 . 9 × 10 - 1                                         |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0724-SFT-hf                            | 7 . 6 × 10 - 1                                         | 4 . 4 × 10 - 6                                         | 9 . 6 × 10 - 1                                         |
| allenai/OLMo-7B-0724-Instruct-hf                       | 8 . 4 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 5 × 10 - 5                                         | 7 . 8 × 10 - 1                                         |
| Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-2   | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-2   | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-2   | Fine-tuned Models with Base Models Trained on OLMo-2   |
| allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B                                 | 4 . 2 × 10 - 1                                         | 7 . 0 × 10 - 1                                         | 5 . 4 × 10 - 15                                        |
| allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B-SFT                             | 6 . 3 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 5 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 9 × 10 - 15                                        |
| allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B-DPO                             | 4 . 7 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 2 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 8 × 10 - 14                                        |
| allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B-Instruct                        | 4 . 9 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1                                         | 3 . 1 × 10 - 14                                        |
| Neelectric/OLMo-2-1124-7B-Instruct_SFT                 | 7 . 1 × 10 - 2                                         | 5 . 4 × 10 - 1                                         | 1 . 7 × 10 - 7                                         |
| Neelectric/OLMo-2-1124-7B-Instruct_GRPO                | 4 . 8 × 10 - 1                                         | 2 . 1 × 10 - 1                                         | 2 . 2 × 10 - 14                                        |

checkpoint B after it (e.g., the step120000 checkpoint), and evaluate B on A 's data and ordering (only samples seen before step100000). We compute ϕ ref query 40K samples with 64 tokens each for all valid base and checkpoint model pairs from step70000 to step140000, in Figure 6. We use pythia as the reference model. Even after the step70000 checkpoint was trained for an additional 70000 steps, the p-value between the step70000 and step140000 models is very small (2.23e-66). We can also see, as perhaps expected, that the p-values are much lower for the 6.9b-parameter models than the 1.4b, 1b, and 410m-parameter models-i.e., the larger model memorizes its training data more.

## A.4 Training for multiple epochs on TinyStories

We train a Transformer-architecture model ( d\_model = 256 , d\_ffn = 512 , num\_layers = 4 , approximately 3M parameters) on the TinyStories dataset [40] for 10 epochs of 50k samples. We run ϕ ref query with the Spearman correlation p-value on the training dataset between the model trained at Epoch i for i = 0 , . . . , 9 ( model\_epoch) on the data ordering of Epoch j for j = 0 , . . . , 9 ( order\_epoch ). The results when using N = 50K and 20K samples are shown in Figure 7. Although variable, memorization effects are strong in general for at least 3 epochs, and the p-value is low in general for the recent 4 or 5 epochs. We use a reference model that uses the same architecture and training strategy but a different training order seed.

## A.5 Reference model ablations

For our experiments, we have used reference models very similar to the candidate model being audited-for example, the pythia-6.9b model as the reference model for testing pythia-6.9b-deduped . We ablate the reference model µ 0 used in ϕ ref query and compare the p-values we get in Table 6. The averaged Llama models are:

- meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B ;
- meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf ; and
- huggyllama/llama-7b ,

and the averaged Pythia models are

- EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-1b ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-410m ;

Figure 6: We run ϕ ref query using 40k samples on pythia-6.9b-deduped , pythia-1.4b-deduped , pythia-1b-deduped , and pythia-410m-deduped checkpoints. We find p-values are low even after significant continued pre-training (70k more steps after the 70k checkpoint), and also that memorization effects are smaller for smaller models.

<!-- image -->

- EleutherAI/pythia-160m ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b-deduped ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b-deduped ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-1b-deduped ;
- EleutherAI/pythia-410m-deduped ; and
- EleutherAI/pythia-160m-deduped .

We can see that there is little signal without using a reference model to account for inherent variations in perplexity of text (the first row). For the later rows, based off the p-values, we conclude that the best reference models are models from the same family, and of similar capability. With 20M tokens, we get p-values significant at 1e-2 for all reference models (and combinations) tested.

## A.6 Estimating logprobs from generated text

Let's consider the case where Bob's API only provides access to the generated text without token probabilities. We show that Alice can still approximate logprobs by repeatedly querying Bob's model.

<!-- image -->

(a) ϕ ref query between order epoch and model epoch for 50k eval samples.

<!-- image -->

(b) ϕ ref query between order epoch and model epoch for 20k eval samples.

Figure 7: We train a Transformer model on TinyStories samples for 10 epochs (of 50k sequences), each of a random data ordering. We report p-values from the 10 epochs on the 10 data orders, which remain small even after 10 epochs.

| Reference Model            | 20M Tokens      | 12M Tokens      | 4M Tokens      |
|----------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|
| None                       | 2 . 1 × 10 - 1  | 5 . 9 × 10 - 1  | 8 . 6 × 10 - 2 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b     | 8 . 0 × 10 - 20 | 3 . 1 × 10 - 15 | 2 . 6 × 10 - 5 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b     | 1 . 0 × 10 - 15 | 7 . 0 × 10 - 12 | 3 . 7 × 10 - 3 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b     | 8 . 1 × 10 - 12 | 3 . 4 × 10 - 9  | 1 . 3 × 10 - 2 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1b       | 7 . 3 × 10 - 10 | 6 . 4 × 10 - 7  | 5 . 5 × 10 - 2 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-410m     | 2 . 5 × 10 - 6  | 2 . 0 × 10 - 4  | 2 . 3 × 10 - 1 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-160m     | 1 . 2 × 10 - 3  | 1 . 2 × 10 - 2  | 9 . 0 × 10 - 1 |
| Averaged Pythia models     | 1 . 7 × 10 - 7  | 1 . 3 × 10 - 5  | 4 . 2 × 10 - 4 |
| meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B | 7 . 9 × 10 - 3  | 9 . 2 × 10 - 3  | 1 . 6 × 10 - 1 |
| Averaged Llama models      | 3 . 9 × 10 - 3  | 1 . 2 × 10 - 2  | 7 . 4 × 10 - 1 |

Table 6: We compute p-values using different reference models µ 0 with ϕ ref query , with EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped as the candidate model. Reference models of similar capability (like EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b or EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b ) yield the lowest pvalues.

Our approach follows a simple idea-given a prefix, we can sample multiple generations to estimate the next token probability. Moreover, Alice does not need to have an accurate probability estimation to compute the test statistics ϕ ref query , as long as the ranking of the estimated probability is highly correlated with the ranking of the actual probability for each sequence. Specifically, we estimate the next token probability of prefix x by random sampling model output N times:

P ( y gt | x ) ≈ E 1 ≤ i ≤ N [ ✶ [ y pred,i = y gt ] ] where y gt is the ground truth continuation of x in the transcript α and y pred,i is the predicted next token for the i th sample. Once we computed the estimated probability, We can apply a reference model as in Eq 2.

We conduct experiments on OLMo-7B , using 3M samples from the Epoch 1 transcript with a prefix length of 16. For each prefix, we repetitively sample up to 16 times. We use OLMo-7B-0724 as our reference model.

Results. We first verify that the Spearman correlation between the ranking of actual logprob and the ranking of estimated logprob is high. When the number of repeated samples is N = 1 / 4 / 16 ,

the correlation is 0 . 7068 / 0 . 8483 / 0 . 9165 respectively. For our test using ϕ ref query , the corresponding p-value is 1 . 6 × 10 -4 / 5 . 6 × 10 -7 / 6 . 4 × 10 -6 .

## B Observational Setting Experimental Details and Additional Results

## B.1 Implementation Details for ϕ part obs

We build the index over a subset (18.75%) of n-grams of the pythia-deduped training set, up to the 100k training checkpoint. (Note that following our problem formulation, this n-gram index can be fully constructed from Alice's transcript (or subset of) α .)

For each of Bob's texts in x β , we count the number of n-gram matches with each of the training documents in our n-gram index, and keep a count of how many matches are at each training step. In particular, each µ i is the list of n-grams seen at training step i (e.g. between the i -th and i +1 -th checkpoint) and the metric χ is the number of matches between x β and µ i . Since we index the first 100k checkpoints, we have the number of models k = 100 , 000 . We count n-grams up to n = 8 .

When counting n-grams, we first start with a series of 8 tokens, then decrease down to one token until a match is found. We also use a time-out feature for practicality, if searching the index for a particular n-gram takes more than 0.01 seconds on our machines, due to the high number of n-grams to index. We believe this does not impact the test effectiveness significantly.

## B.2 Implementation Details for ϕ shuff obs

We treat Bob's text x β as a collection of shorter documents and let χ be the average log-likelihood of these documents under each model, either before or after finetuning. In the case where we do finetune on x β , we do so for one epoch with a learning rate of 1 × 10 -5 with 4 documents per batch.

OnTinyStories, we use the same model architecture ( d\_model = 256 , d\_ffn = 512 , num\_layers = 4 , approximately 3M parameters) as in the multiple epoch experiments. For the observational setting experiments, we train for a single epoch on 500K documents with a constant learning rate of 1 × 10 -5 and 4 documents per batch. We save checkpoints every 10k documents starting at 450K documents, which we use to resume training on reshuffled data to obtain the models µ 1 , ..., µ k in our implementation of ϕ shuff obs .

We obtain Bob's model by continuing to train on additional documents from the TinyStories training set (distinct from the 500K documents we use to train Alice's model). Unlike when we resume training from an intermediate checkpoint in ϕ shuff obs , we reinitialize the optimizer state for Bob's model.

## B.3 Sampling Parameter Ablations for ϕ part obs

We report p-values computed from ϕ part obs for the pythia-6.9b-deduped-step100000 model and generated texts, which are prefixed with random sequences from The Pile. We vary sampling temperature and top\_p (with temperature) in Figure 8.

We find that the results are somewhat sensitive to temperature; in particular, our test is less effective at lower temperatures, potentially due to the lack of text diversity limiting the effective sample size.

## B.4 TinyStories Ablations for ϕ shuff obs

We report additional results on TinyStories with the ϕ shuff obs statistic. We vary the amount of retraining and finetuning together (Figure 9), the sampling temperature (Figure 10) and model size (Figure 11). We find that increasing the amount of retraining improves robustness to finetuning (as expected). Our test generally works well across a range of sampling temperatures, and notably works unexpectedly well at temperature 0 . 9 for enough tokens (recall we report results at temperature 1 . 0 for all other experiments). Finally, our test is more effective when scaling up the model size.

## B.5 Validity of ϕ shuff obs

We plot the empirical distribution of output of ϕ shuff obs under the null in Figure 12. We generate samples of text from the null by training an independent copy of Alice's model from scratch (i.e., we keep all training hyperaparameters the same but use a different random seed). The output empirically behaves

(a) We vary Bob's sampling temperature and number of total tokens. (b) We vary Bob's top\_p sampling parameter and fix the 6.4M total tokens.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8: We report median p-values and interquartile ranges over 10 trials of ϕ part obs using n-gram counts for pythia-6.9b-deduped-step100000 while varying sampling parameters of Bob's model. Because sampling is expensive, for each trial we resample generations with replacement from an initial sample of 50K generations (i.e., 6.4M tokens), so the reported ranges are likely narrower than true confidence bands.

Figure 9: We report approximate p-values from applying ϕ shuff obs to TinyStories models, varying the amount of retraining in the test and the amount of finetuning by Bob.

<!-- image -->

like a conservative p-value, in the sense that the probability it is less than x for x ∈ [0 , 1] is at most x (whereas for a true p-value the probability would be equal to x ). Concretely, this implies that the approximate p-values we report from ϕ shuff obs are typically larger than true p-values.

## B.6 Additional OLMo Results for ϕ shuff obs

In Table 7, we evaluate ϕ shuff obs on OLMo-2-0425-1B and OLMo-2-1124-7B for different sizes of Bob's text, using the same protocol described in Section 4.3.2 but for smaller token counts. Notably, even evaluating a single generation (i.e., | x β | = 32 ) we observe p-values on the order of 10 -3 and 10 -5 roughly a quarter of the time at the 1B and 7B scales respectively.

## C Discussion of Related Work [17, 18]

We discuss two related works in the query setting. Both Nikolic et al. [17] and Jin et al. [18] try to determine whether two models are independently trained versus not based on the similarity of their outputs. Neither approach yields exact p-values, and moreoever we show that they can be unreliable

Figure 10: We report approximate p-values from applying ϕ shuff obs to TinyStories models, varying the sampling temperature of Bob's model.

<!-- image -->

Figure 11: We report approximate p-values from applying ϕ shuff obs to TinyStories models of different scales. We obtain the 24M parameter model using the exact same procedure as for the 3M model, except we increase all intermediate activation sizes (i.e., both for self-attention and MLP layers) and the number of layers each by a factor of two. The total parameter counts are rough estimates. (Left) We vary the number of tokens in Bob's text and do not finetune on Bob's text. (Right) We finetune on Bob's text and vary the amount of finetuning by Bob, with results for the smaller model in solid.

<!-- image -->

in practice for models independently trained on similar data. By using specific prompts to generate responses, both methods also do not work for the observational setting.

Nikolic et al. [17] count token matches in outputs between two models µ α and µ β (i.e., Alice and Bob's models) over prompts x j , and compare a similarity score based on these counts between µ α and µ β versus between µ β and a class of reference models (see Algorithm 1 in [17]). In particular, this does not yield provably exact p-values for independently trained models.

We run an experiment involving Pythia models to show a failure mode of their test-the test indicates that pythia-1.4b and pythia-1.4b-deduped are not independent, even though they were two independent runs trained on two different transcripts. Specifically, we use the reference models given in their Bench A and compute similarity of Pile sequence prompts (which likely all the models were trained on) with pythia-1.4b , shown in Table 8.

We see that the similarity between the independent pythia-1.4b and pythia-1.4b-deduped models (0.7976) is higher than the similarity between the finetune pair pythia-1.4b and pythia1.4B-finetuned-on-lamini-docs (0.7714). Using a z-test with the given reference models from [17] would yield a p-value of 9.622e-06 for the independence between pythia-1.4b and pythia-1.4b-deduped , when in fact they are independent, meaning there is potentially a very

Figure 12: We plot the distribution of the output by ϕ shuff obs under the null.

<!-- image -->

Table 7: Median p-values (with interquartile ranges) across 10 trials from applying ϕ shuff obs to OLMo-2-0425-1B and OLMo-2-1124-7B .

| Model Size   | &#124; x β &#124; = 32                             | 96                                                 | 160                                                | 320                                                |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| 1B           | 1 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 4 . 4 × 10 - 3 , 4 . 6 × 10 - 1 ) | 9 . 7 × 10 - 2 ( 1 . 0 × 10 - 6 , 3 . 3 × 10 - 1 ) | 1 . 1 × 10 - 1 ( 3 . 4 × 10 - 5 , 2 . 2 × 10 - 1 ) | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1 ( 6 . 5 × 10 - 3 , 2 . 8 × 10 - 1 ) |
| 7B           | 3 . 7 × 10 - 1 ( 2 . 7 × 10 - 5 , 7 . 5 × 10 - 1 ) | 1 . 3 × 10 - 1 ( 5 . 4 × 10 - 3 , 3 . 0 × 10 - 1 ) | 9 . 9 × 10 - 2 ( 3 . 0 × 10 - 5 , 3 . 2 × 10 - 1 ) | 4 . 5 × 10 - 3 ( 1 . 0 × 10 - 6 , 4 . 9 × 10 - 2 ) |

high false positive rate. In contrast, our methods yield provably exact p-values (see Theorem 1) where we can control for Type-I error.

Jin et al. [18] craft prompts for models and compare the similarity of outputs. Like Nikolic et al. [17], they use a metric 'target response rate" (TRR) that measures similarity of responses, and they identify two models as fine-tunes if their TRR is higher compared to the values for non fine-tunes. However, they find that independently trained models from the same model developer may have similar responses, and they classify such models as 'related" (e.g. may share training data, for example). As such, in Table III of their paper, they find the TRR between Mistral-7B-v0.1 and Mistral-7B-v0.2 is 0.70 and higher than the TRR with any Mistral-7B-v0.1 fine-tunes, although the first two are independent.

## D Compute and Cost

## D.1 Audits and Cost Analysis

Auditing and cost. We give cost estimates of running the query-setting test for current language model APIs. For our test under the query setting, we observe that logprob over 64M token samples is typically enough to achieve a p-value below 10 -3 . Thus, we estimate the cost using a sample of 8M sequences, each with 8 tokens.

As of May 2025, the cost of querying 1M inference tokens for OpenAI GPT-4.1 mini is $0.40 per 1M input tokens and $1.60 per 1M output tokens 7 . Computing an average over a window size of 7 ( 8 × 8 / 2 = 32 tokens per sequence) with one output token per window would have a cost of $ 0 . 40 × 8 × (1 + 2 + · · · +7) + $1 . 60 × 8 × 7 = $179.20. Some models may require fewer tokens, such as the Pythia family.

Note that some APIs only give top-k logprobs or text output. In this case, one can estimate logprobs using the method described in Appendix A.6.

7 https://platform.openai.com/docs/pricing

| model                                         | fine-tuned?   |   µ with pythia-1.4b |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------|
| meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct              | ×             |               0.5451 |
| meta-llama/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct              | ×             |               0.5408 |
| microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct              | ×             |               0.6137 |
| microsoft/phi-2                               | ×             |               0.6453 |
| google/gemma-2b                               | ×             |               0.6322 |
| google/gemma-2-2b                             | ×             |               0.6148 |
| Qwen/Qwen2-1.5B                               | ×             |               0.6126 |
| Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct                    | ×             |               0.4875 |
| deepseek-ai/deepseek-coder-1.3b-base          | ×             |               0.5473 |
| TinyLlama/TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0            | ×             |               0.605  |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b                        | ✓             |               1      |
| nnheui/pythia-1.4b-sft-full                   | ✓             |               0.8205 |
| herMaster/pythia1.4B-finetuned-on-lamini-docs | ✓             |               0.7714 |
| EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b-deduped                | ×             |               0.7976 |

Table 8: We compute model output similarities µ following Nikolic et al. [17] between pythia-1.4b and other models on HuggingFace. The similarity with the independent pythia-1.4b-deduped is higher than the similarity with a pythia-1.4b fine-tune.

The observational setting does not require querying an API, as Alice passively observes text generated by Bob's model.

## D.2 Compute Resources

We run our experiments on an internal cluster using NVIDIA A100 and A6000 GPUs. The primary compute use for our methods is getting the perplexity of samples for different models. For a 6.9bparameter language model (the majority of our experiments), computing the perplexity on 1M sequences of length 64 tokens per sequence takes around 75 mins on a single A100 GPU.

For the observational setting, we build the n-gram to training steps index for Pythia's pre-training data using the infini-gram package [42]. We index 18.75% of the training data, which takes 258G disk space. To run the test ϕ part obs once all the documents are processed, which involves getting the counts of n-gram matches at each train step, takes around 1 minute for 100000 texts (12.8M tokens), and scales approximately linearly with number of tokens (most processing time is disk IO).

Training the TinyStories models described in Appendix A.4 for 50000 sequences [40] takes around 10 minutes on a A6000 machine.

## NeurIPS Paper Checklist

## 1. Claims

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper's contributions and scope?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We clearly state our claims and assumptions in our problem formulation (Section 3.1). We prove the validity of our tests in Theorem 1, and present emprical evidence (Section 4) supporting the main claims that our methods can determine provenance for fine-tuned models and generated text. We discuss our limitations in Section 5.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper.
- The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
- The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
- It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper.

## 2. Limitations

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes, we discuss limitations in our discussion section (see Section 5).

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
- The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
- The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
- The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
- The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
- The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size.
- If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness.
- While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren't acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

## 3. Theory assumptions and proofs

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes, we have one theoretical result (Theorem 1), and we provide its proof in the main text. Assumptions are clearly stated in the theorem statement.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
- All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced.
- All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
- The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition.
- Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
- Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

## 4. Experimental result reproducibility

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We provide sufficient details about our experiments to reproduce them (see the section on Experimental Setup, Section 4.1). We also plan to release code prior to publication.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not.
- If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
- Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
- While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example
- (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.
- (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully.
- (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).
- (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

## 5. Open access to data and code

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?

Answer: [No]

Justification: We do not yet provide our code or experimental data, but we plan to release all relevant artifacts before publication.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.

- Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/public/ guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so 'No' is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).
- The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
- The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
- The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
- At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable).
- Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

## 6. Experimental setting/details

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes we describe details for our experiments (Section 4.1), such as which models we test from HuggingFace and the datasets used. We have more details for experiments discussed in the Appendix.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
- The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

## 7. Experiment statistical significance

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes; our main results all yield exact p-values (see Theorem 1). These p-values allow for false positive control, and we report results for fine-tuned and non-fine-tuned model pairs. We also describe a classification task and our accuracy.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.
- The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).
- The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
- The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
- It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.
- It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.
- For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).

- If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

## 8. Experiments compute resources

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: Yes, in Appendix D we discuss compute resources used for our experiments. Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
- The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
- The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
- The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn't make it into the paper).

## 9. Code of ethics

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We use public models and datasets on HuggingFace, do not involve human subjects, and don't believe our work has harmful consequences or impacts.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
- If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics.
- The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

## 10. Broader impacts

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We discuss the broader impact of our work in the introduction, and how it is important for IP protection for model developers. We do not believe our work has negative societal impacts.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
- If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
- Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
- The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.
- The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.

- If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

## 11. Safeguards

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: NA

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
- Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
- Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
- We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.

## 12. Licenses for existing assets

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?

Answer: [Yes]

Justification: We cite existing code packages (and the associated papers where applicable) that we use for our methods. The language models we test are public from HuggingFace (Apache 2.0 licenses) and we cite relevant original papers if they are online.

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
- The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
- The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
- The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
- For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided.
- If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
- For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
- If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset's creators.

## 13. New assets

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: NA

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
- Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc.
- The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used.

- At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

## 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: NA

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper.
- According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.

## 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?

Answer: [NA]

Justification: NA

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
- Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper.
- We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution.
- For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

## 16. Declaration of LLM usage

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or nonstandard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.

Answer: [NA]

Justification: NA

Guidelines:

- The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
- Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described.